=== PAGE 1 ===
REAL-TIME WILDLIFE MONITORING AND
INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM USING DEEP
LEARNING (YOLOv11)
A PROJECT REPORT
Submitted by
KIRANKUMAR S (920122243018)
SIVANESWARAN S (920122243038)
SOORAN K (920122243041)
in partial fulfillment for the award of the degree
of
BACHELOR OF ENGINEERING
IN
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE AND DATA SCIENCE
BHARATH NIKETAN ENGINEERING COLLEGE
(Approved by AICTE New Delhi & Affiliated to Anna University -
9Chennai)
ANNA UNIVERSITY :: CHENNAI 600 025
MAY 2026
i
=== PAGE 2 ===
ANNA UNIVERSITY :: CHENNAI 600 025
BONAFIDE CERTIFICATE
Certified that this project report titled "REAL-TIME WILDLIFE
MONITORING AND INTRUSION DETECTION SYSTEM USING DEEP
LEARNING (YOLOv11)" is the bonafide work of KIRANKUMAR S
(920122243018), SIVANESWARAN S (920122243038) and SOORAN
K(920122243041) who carried out the project work under my supervision.
Certified further that to the best of my knowledge the work reported herein
does not form part of any other thesis or dissertation on the basis of which a
degree or award was conferred on an earlier occasion on this or any other
candidate.
SIGNATURE SIGNATURE
MR. M. KASIPANDI, M.E., MS. K. VAISHNAVI, M.CA.,
HEAD OF THE DEPARTMENT, SUPERVISOR,
Department of AI & DS, Department of AI & DS,
Bharath Niketan EngineeringCollege, Bharath Niketan Engineering College,
Aundipatti - 625 536. Aundipatti - 625 536
Submitted for the Anna University Project Viva-Voce Examination
held on _____________________.
INTERNAL EXAMINER EXTERNAL EXAMINER
ii
=== PAGE 3 ===
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
First and foremost, we express our sincere gratitude to the Almighty for
showering His abundant blessings throughout the course of this project work.
We extend our heartfelt thanks to our beloved Chairman and Secretary
of Bharath Niketan Engineering College, Aundipatti, for providing the
necessary infrastructure and a conducive academic environment to carry out
this project successfully.
We are deeply indebted to our Principal for his constant encouragement
and for granting us the opportunity to undertake this project as part of our
undergraduate curriculum.
We sincerely thank Dr. MR. M. KASIPANDI, M.E., Head of the
Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science, for the unwavering
support, valuable insights, and continuous motivation extended to us
throughout the project work.
We owe a debt of gratitude to our Project Supervisor, MS. K.
VAISHNAVI , M.E., Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science,
for the constructive guidance, technical advice, patience, and dedicated
mentorship that proved instrumental in the successful completion of this
project.
We also extend our sincere appreciation to all the faculty members of
the Department of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science for their valuable
suggestions and timely help. Special thanks are due to the laboratory staff who
assisted us during the development and testing phases.
Finally, we wish to acknowledge with deep gratitude the unconditional
love, encouragement, and moral support of our parents and friends, without
whom this endeavour would not have been possible.
iii
=== PAGE 4 ===
ABSTRACT
Wildlife intrusion into human settlements has emerged as a pressing
challenge for forest-fringe communities and conservation authorities,
frequently resulting in human casualties, large-scale destruction of standing
crops, livestock predation, and the retaliatory killing of endangered species
due to the inherent latency of manual monitoring. To address this critical gap,
a reliable, real-time animal detection platform has been developed integrating
the state-of-the-art YOLOv11 deep learning architecture. Processing live
video feeds from edge cameras, the system leverages YOLOv11's novel C3k2
backbone blocks for multi-scale spatial feature extraction and C2PSA
position-sensitive attention modules to accurately identify threat species—
including tigers, leopards, bears, elephants, lions, and cheetahs. Advanced
computer vision techniques drastically reduce false alarms triggered by
vegetation movement or non-harmful entities. The platform is operated
through an interactive Streamlit dashboard featuring distinct modules for
forensic static image analysis and continuous live border surveillance. When
a threat is detected with a confidence level exceeding an operator-defined
threshold, the system instantaneously dispatches SMS alerts to forest rangers
via the Twilio cloud communication API. A session-state cooldown algorithm
is effectively integrated to prevent message spamming during prolonged
animal encounters and to strictly comply with telecom carrier rate limits.
Quantitative testing on commodity hardware confirms a sustained real-time
inference rate of approximately thirty frames per second and a minimal end-
to-end alert latency of two to four seconds. Ultimately, by providing
continuous, autonomous twenty-four-hour surveillance at vulnerable borders,
this deployment accelerates rapid response capabilities, simultaneously
maximizing the safety of human settlements and promoting wildlife
conservation.
iv
=== PAGE 5 ===
TABLE OF CONTENTS
CHAPTER NO. TITLE PAGE NO.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 3
ABSTRACT iv
LIST OF TABLES viii
LIST OF FIGURES ix
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS x
1. INTRODUCTION 1
1.1 Background 1
1.2 Problem Statement 3
1.3 Objectives 4
1.4 Scope of the Project 5
1.5 Organisation of the Report 6
2. LITERATURE REVIEW 8
2.1 Evolution of Object Detection Models 8
2.2 YOLO Framework 9
2.3 Wild Animal Detection using YOLOv8 10
2.4 WilDect-YOLO for Endangered Species 11
2.5 Deep Learning for Dynamic Wildlife Monitoring 12
2.6 Comparative Analysis 12
2.7 Research Gaps Identified 13
3. SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND FEASIBILITY 15
3.1 Existing System 15
3.2 Proposed System 17
v
=== PAGE 6 ===
3.3 Feasibility Study 19
4. SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS 22
4.1 Hardware Requirements 22
4.2 Software Requirements 23
4.3 API Specifications (Twilio) 24
4.4 Functional Requirements 25
4.5 Non-Functional Requirements 26
5. MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF CNNs 27
5.1 The Convolution Operation 27
5.2 Activation Functions 28
5.3 Loss Functions in YOLO 29
5.4 Backpropagation and Optimization 31
6. SYSTEM DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE 33
6.1 System Architecture Design 33
6.2 UML Diagrams 35
6.3 Data Flow Diagram 38
7. DATASET PREPARATION AND AUGMENTATION 40
7.1 Dataset Acquisition 40
7.2 Annotation and Formatting 41
7.3 Data Augmentation Strategy 43
8. METHODOLOGY AND DEEP LEARNING
FRAMEWORK 46
8.1 YOLOv11 Algorithm Deep Dive 46
8.2 Grad-CAM Explainable AI 48
8.3 Integration Technologies 50
vi
=== PAGE 7 ===
9. IMPLEMENTATION AND SOURCE CODE 52
9.1 Training Implementation 52
9.2 Main Application Pipeline 53
10. SOFTWARE TESTING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE 58
10.1 Testing Strategy 58
10.2 Test Cases Matrix 60
11. RESULTS, METRICS, AND DISCUSSION 62
11.1 System Initialization 62
11.2 Image Analysis Results 63
11.3 Live Surveillance Results 64
11.4 Twilio Alert Validation 65
11.5 Performance Metrics 68
12. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE 69
12.1 Conclusion 69
12.2 Future Work 70
APPENDIX 1 - CONFIGURATION AND DEPLOYMENT 73
APPENDIX 2 - TROUBLESHOOTING GUIDE 75
REFERENCES 78
vii
=== PAGE 8 ===
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE NO. CAPTION PAGE NO.
Table 2.1Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Models 24
Table 4.1Recommended Hardware Specifications 33
Table 4.2Software Stack and Version Matrix 35
Table 4.3Functional Requirements Summary 36
Table 4.4Non-Functional Requirements Summary 37
Table 7.1Dataset Class Distribution Statistics 50
Table 7.2Augmentation Techniques and Probabilities 53
Table 10.1Test Cases Matrix 69
Table 11.1Quantitative Performance Metrics 73
viii
=== PAGE 9 ===
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE NO. CAPTION PAGE NO.
Figure 6.1 Modular Decomposition of the Forest Guard AI System 45
Figure 6.2 Forest Guard AI Use Case DIagram 48
Figure 6.2.2 Live Surveiliance Activity Diagram 48
Figure 6.3 Level - 1 Data Flow Diagram (DFD) 50
Figure 11.1 Streamlit Dashboard Initialization 70
Figure 11.2 Forest Guard AI interface demonstrating real-time elephant
detection with bounding boxes and confidence scores 72
Figure 11.3 Forest Guard AI system output demonstrating the real-time
detection of a single elephant, complete with a bounding box and a danger
alert confidence score 73
Figure 11.4 Automated SMS alerts received on a mobile device notifying
the user of detected elephants and tigers. 75
ix
=== PAGE 10 ===
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ABBREVIATION EXPANSION
AI Artificial Intelligence
ANN Artificial Neural Network
API Application Programming Interface
BCE Binary Cross Entropy
CCTV Closed-Circuit Television
CIoU Complete Intersection over Union
CNN Convolutional Neural Network
COCO Common Objects in Context
CPaaS Communications Platform as a Service
CPU Central Processing Unit
CUDA Compute Unified Device Architecture
DFD Data Flow Diagram
FPS Frames Per Second
GPU Graphics Processing Unit
GUI Graphical User Interface
HOG Histogram of Oriented Gradients
HTTP/HTTPS HyperText Transfer Protocol / Secure
HWC Human-Wildlife Conflict
IoT Internet of Things
IoU Intersection over Union
IP Internet Protocol
JSON JavaScript Object Notation
mAP Mean Average Precision
MPS Messages Per Second
OS Operating System
PIR Passive Infrared (sensor)
RAM Random Access Memory
x
=== PAGE 11 ===
R-CNN Region-based Convolutional Neural Network
ReLU Rectified Linear Unit
REST Representational State Transfer
RGB / BGR Red-Green-Blue / Blue-Green-Red colour ordering
RTSP Real-Time Streaming Protocol
SDK Software Development Kit
SGD Stochastic Gradient Descent
SID Service Identifier
SiLU Sigmoid Linear Unit
SMS Short Message Service
SPPF Spatial Pyramid Pooling - Fast
SSD Single Shot Detector / Solid State Drive
SVM Support Vector Machine
TPU Tensor Processing Unit
UAV Unmanned Aerial Vehicle
UI / UX User Interface / User Experience
UML Unified Modeling Language
XAI Explainable Artificial Intelligence
You Only Look Once
YOLO
xi
=== PAGE 12 ===
CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
The geographical boundaries that historically separated dense forest
reserves from human settlements have, over the past several decades, become
increasingly indistinct. Rapid deforestation driven by commercial logging, the
relentless pace of urbanisation in tier-two and tier-three Indian cities, and the
steady expansion of agricultural land into peripheral forest zones have
collectively eroded the natural buffer that once existed between the wild and
the cultivated. The cumulative effect of these anthropogenic pressures is a
long, porous, and largely unmonitored interface where humans and large fauna
come into frequent and often violent contact.
This phenomenon, formally classified by ecologists and policymakers
as Human-Wildlife Conflict (HWC), poses simultaneous threats to several
stakeholder groups. From the perspective of the forest-fringe villager, an
unannounced nocturnal visit by a herd of wild elephants can devastate months
of cultivated paddy or sugarcane in a single night, wiping out a season of
household income. Predator species such as leopards and tigers occasionally
stray into livestock pens, killing cattle, goats, and dogs, and on rare but tragic
occasions, lifting children. From the perspective of the conservationist, every
such incident materially raises the risk of retaliatory action by aggrieved
villagers, including poisoning, electrocution using illegally tapped electric
fences, and direct lethal force, often inflicted upon animals belonging to
species already classified as endangered or critically endangered under the
IUCN Red List.
1
=== PAGE 13 ===
Traditional approaches to forest boundary surveillance have relied
almost exclusively on manual patrolling by departmental forest guards and
rangers. These professionals, often poorly paid and inadequately equipped,
walk or ride along the perimeter in designated shifts, scanning the
undergrowth with hand-held torches or, at best, low-resolution night-vision
binoculars. Such an approach is inherently labour-intensive, time-consuming,
and most importantly, places human personnel at significant physical risk; an
unannounced encounter with a charging elephant or a cornered leopard
frequently proves fatal. Furthermore, the sheer geographical extent of typical
forest perimeters, which can run into hundreds of kilometres for a single
reserve, makes simultaneous monitoring of every vulnerable entry point
physically impossible with any realistic manpower allocation.
The recent maturation of artificial intelligence, and in particular the
deep-learning subfield of computer vision, has triggered a paradigm shift in
how surveillance tasks of this nature can be approached. Object-detection
neural networks now routinely surpass human-level accuracy on benchmark
datasets, and modern edge-deployable architectures can perform inference in
real time on inexpensive consumer hardware. The application of such models
to wildlife monitoring is consequently transitioning rapidly from a research
curiosity to a practical necessity for forest departments across India and the
wider developing world. Pilot deployments in countries such as Kenya,
Botswana, and Indonesia have already demonstrated measurable reductions in
both human casualties and retaliatory animal killings.
It is against this background that the present project has been conceived.
Our work seeks to combine a state-of-the-art deep-learning detector, namely
YOLOv11, with a robust cloud-based alerting mechanism, namely the Twilio
Short Message Service gateway, and to expose the entire pipeline through an
intuitive web dashboard built on the Streamlit framework. The objective is not
2
=== PAGE 14 ===
merely to demonstrate detection accuracy in isolation, but to deliver a
complete, deployable, end-to-end system that a non-technical forest guard can
install, configure, and operate with minimal training.
1.2 Problem Statement
Existing forest boundary surveillance systems suffer from a debilitating
combination of high latency, low specificity, and poor connectivity, all of
which conspire to render them effectively useless for the purpose of
preventing imminent human-wildlife encounters. By the time the presence of
a dangerous animal in proximity to a village or to standing crops is brought to
the attention of the relevant authorities through conventional channels, the
damage, whether to property or to human life, has typically already been
inflicted. Nighttime surveillance, the period during which the majority of large
predators are most active, is particularly ineffective when conducted using
unaided human vision; basic infrared motion sensors, often deployed as a low-
cost alternative, generate so many false alarms (triggered by falling leaves,
swaying branches, wind gusts, small birds, and harmless small mammals) that
forest officials inevitably develop alarm fatigue and begin to ignore the
sensors entirely.
A second critical gap exists in the communication layer between the
moment of detection and the moment of notification. In remote forest areas,
standard cellular network availability is intermittent at best; dedicated wireless
infrastructure is rare and expensive; and even when a camera trap successfully
captures a damning frame of an intruding animal, the image is typically stored
locally on a removable memory card that must be physically retrieved by a
guard, sometimes days or weeks after the event. This data may be valuable for
retrospective ecological research and for population census purposes, but it is
wholly worthless for the immediate, time-critical task of preventing damage
and protecting human life.
3
=== PAGE 15 ===
There is, therefore, an urgent and clearly articulated need for an
automated, high-speed, highly accurate detection system that operates
continuously around the clock, that correctly classifies the species of any
detected animal, that distinguishes confidently between threatening and non-
threatening species, and that alerts the appropriate authorities within seconds
of detection over commercially available cellular networks. Crucially, such a
system must achieve the above without generating an unmanageable volume
of false-positive alerts that would themselves undermine operational
confidence.
1.3 Objectives
The primary objectives of this project have been formulated to address
each of the operational deficiencies identified in the preceding problem
statement. They are enumerated as follows:
• To design and implement a real-time wildlife monitoring system using
the latest YOLOv11 object-detection architecture, capable of accurately
detecting and classifying multiple species of large wild fauna under a
wide range of environmental conditions.
• To prevent human-wildlife conflicts and the consequent destruction of
agricultural crops and human casualties through the early detection of
dangerous animals as they approach or cross designated forest
boundaries.
• To integrate a robust cloud-based communication module utilising the
Twilio REST API for sending instantaneous SMS alerts to forest
rangers and other designated stakeholders in a highly reliable manner.
• To maintain consistently high detection accuracy in challenging forest
terrains, effectively handling adverse conditions such as low ambient
4
=== PAGE 16 ===
lighting, occluded environments, dense foliage, partial visibility of the
target subject, and natural camouflage of the animal.
• To develop an intuitive and visually accessible Graphical User Interface
using the Streamlit framework, enabling non-technical forest guards to
operate the system, analyse static images uploaded from camera traps,
and monitor live video feeds without the need for any prior
programming knowledge or command-line proficiency.
• To incorporate intelligent rate-limiting and cooldown mechanisms
within the alert dispatch logic, thereby preventing notification fatigue
while still ensuring that operationally significant events are reported to
stakeholders without undue delay.
• To validate the proposed system through a structured programme of
unit, integration, and system-level testing, and to quantify its
performance against well-established detection metrics including
precision, recall, and mean Average Precision.
1.4 Scope of the Project
The scope of this project encompasses the design, training, integration,
and deployment of a complete deep-learning-driven surveillance system. The
work involves curating and augmenting a domain-specific image dataset of
wild animals; training a custom YOLOv11 detection model on this dataset;
encapsulating the trained model within a Python-based web application built
using the Streamlit framework; integrating with the Twilio cloud SMS
gateway for outbound notifications; and validating the end-to-end system
using both synthetic test data and live camera feeds.
The system is designed to detect and classify a closed set of animal
species deemed harmful to either human life or agricultural produce, namely
tiger, leopard, bear, elephant, lion, and cheetah. Upon successful classification
5
=== PAGE 17 ===
with a confidence score exceeding the operator-configurable threshold, the
system automatically draws an on-screen visual warning in the form of a
coloured bounding box and dispatches a structured SMS message to a
registered cellular number via the Twilio cloud gateway.
The proposed software system is deliberately designed to be hardware-
agnostic. It can be deployed on standard consumer-grade USB webcams, on
integrated laptop cameras, on high-definition Internet Protocol cameras
connected via the Real-Time Streaming Protocol, or on closed-circuit
television systems already installed at vulnerable forest borders. The
minimum recommended host configuration is a mid-range laptop or desktop
computer running Windows 10 or Ubuntu Linux 22.04, with an optional
discrete NVIDIA GPU recommended for higher inference throughput. Edge-
device deployment on platforms such as the NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano or the
Raspberry Pi 5 is identified as a future-work direction.
1.5 Organisation of the Report
This project report is organised into twelve chapters and three
appendices, each structured to address a specific phase of the project life-
cycle. Chapter 1 introduces the problem domain, articulates the motivation,
and establishes the objectives. Chapter 2 surveys the existing literature on
object detection in general and on wildlife monitoring in particular, identifying
the gaps that the present work seeks to address. Chapter 3 conducts a
comparative analysis between the existing methods and the proposed system,
and presents a feasibility study covering technical, economic, and operational
dimensions. Chapter 4 enumerates the hardware, software, and API
specifications required for deployment.
Chapter 5 develops the mathematical foundations underlying
convolutional neural networks, including the convolution operation,
6
=== PAGE 18 ===
activation functions, loss formulations, and the backpropagation algorithm.
Chapter 6 presents the system architecture together with all relevant Unified
Modeling Language diagrams. Chapter 7 describes the dataset acquisition,
annotation, and augmentation procedures. Chapter 8 provides a detailed
treatment of the YOLOv11 algorithm and the supporting integration
technologies. Chapter 9 lists and explains the complete source code of the
application. Chapter 10 documents the testing strategy and the test-case
matrix. Chapter 11 reports and discusses the experimental results. Chapter 12
concludes the report and outlines future enhancements. The appendices
contain deployment instructions, a troubleshooting guide, and the
bibliographic references.
7
=== PAGE 19 ===
CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
2.1 Evolution of Object Detection Models
The discipline of object detection has undergone a dramatic and well-
documented evolution over the last two decades, transitioning from hand-
crafted feature engineering to end-to-end learned representations. The earliest
practical object detectors of the late 1990s and early 2000s relied heavily on
manually designed feature extraction algorithms. Among the most influential
of these were the Haar-cascade classifiers introduced by Viola and Jones in
2001, which proved remarkably effective for the specific sub-problem of
frontal face detection but generalised poorly to objects with greater intra-class
variability. The Histogram of Oriented Gradients feature descriptor,
introduced by Dalal and Triggs in 2005, when paired with a linear Support
Vector Machine classifier, became the gold standard for pedestrian detection
but again struggled to scale to multi-class general-purpose detection.
The decisive break with hand-crafted features came in 2014 with the
introduction of Region-based Convolutional Neural Networks by Girshick and
colleagues. R-CNN proposed a two-stage pipeline in which approximately
two thousand candidate regions were first extracted from the input image
using an external selective-search algorithm, then passed individually through
a deep CNN classifier. The accuracy of R-CNN on standard benchmarks such
as PASCAL VOC was unprecedented, but the computational cost was
prohibitive: a single image required tens of seconds of processing time on a
high-end GPU, rendering the approach completely unsuitable for real-time
video surveillance.
Subsequent refinements of the R-CNN family, namely Fast R-CNN in
2015 and Faster R-CNN in 2016, progressively improved both the accuracy
8
=== PAGE 20 ===
and the throughput of two-stage detection. Faster R-CNN, in particular,
replaced the external selective-search proposal generator with a learned
Region Proposal Network, bringing inference time down to approximately
five frames per second on contemporary hardware. However, even this
improved throughput remained insufficient for true real-time operation on live
video streams at thirty frames per second or higher.
Parallel research efforts produced one-stage detectors that
fundamentally reframed the detection problem as a single end-to-end
regression task, dispensing entirely with the proposal-generation stage. The
Single Shot Multi-Box Detector, introduced by Liu and colleagues in 2016,
achieved real-time inference rates while maintaining respectable accuracy.
The You Only Look Once family, introduced in the same year by Redmon and
colleagues, pushed the speed-accuracy frontier even further and has, through
successive iterations, established itself as the de facto standard architecture for
real-time object detection.
2.2 You Only Look Once (YOLO) Framework
Redmon and colleagues introduced the original YOLO framework in
their seminal 2016 paper, which has since been cited tens of thousands of
times. The fundamental insight of the YOLO architecture is to reframe object
detection as a single regression problem applied directly to the entire input
image, rather than as a multi-stage classification pipeline operating on
candidate regions. Concretely, the YOLO network divides the input image
into an S×S grid; each grid cell is responsible for predicting a fixed number of
bounding boxes together with the associated class probabilities and an
objectness score that quantifies the confidence that any object is present within
the cell.
9
=== PAGE 21 ===
The unified, single-pass nature of YOLO inference results in detection
speeds that exceed those of two-stage detectors by an order of magnitude,
while sacrificing only a modest amount of accuracy on standard benchmarks.
The original YOLOv1 achieved approximately forty-five frames per second
on a Titan X GPU; subsequent versions have steadily improved both speed
and accuracy through architectural refinements. YOLOv2 introduced anchor
boxes and multi-scale training; YOLOv3 introduced the Darknet-53 backbone
and feature pyramid networks; YOLOv4 added a wide range of training-time
augmentations collectively known as the bag of freebies; YOLOv5 offered a
more accessible PyTorch implementation; YOLOv6 and YOLOv7 introduced
further architectural optimisations; YOLOv8 introduced anchor-free
detection; and YOLOv9, v10, and v11 have each added attention mechanisms,
more efficient backbones, and superior small-object detection capabilities.
2.3 Wild Animal Detection using YOLOv8
Dave and colleagues, writing in Procedia Computer Science in 2023,
presented one of the earliest comprehensive evaluations of YOLOv8 for wild
animal detection. Their work made use of a curated dataset comprising several
thousand images spanning multiple Indian wildlife species, with annotations
performed manually using the LabelImg tool. The authors reported that
YOLOv8 introduced two principal architectural advances over its immediate
predecessors: an anchor-free detection mechanism that eliminated the need for
hand-tuned anchor box priors, and a redesigned neural network backbone that
improved feature reuse and gradient flow.
Their experimental results indicated mean Average Precision values
comfortably above eighty percent on the held-out test set, validating the
practical viability of YOLOv8 for the wildlife monitoring domain. However,
the authors candidly acknowledged that YOLOv8 lacked some of the more
advanced spatial attention mechanisms that would later be introduced in
10
=== PAGE 22 ===
YOLOv9 and YOLOv11. As a consequence, the model occasionally struggled
with highly camouflaged animals, particularly leopards photographed against
dense, dappled foliage, a scenario that is unfortunately extremely common in
real-world Indian forest reserves. Their concluding observation, that the false-
negative rate in heavily occluded environments warranted further architectural
refinement, directly motivated the choice of YOLOv11 in the present work.
2.4 WilDect-YOLO for Endangered Species
Roy and colleagues, writing in Ecological Informatics in July 2023,
proposed a custom variant of the YOLO architecture specifically tailored for
the detection of endangered wildlife, which they named WilDect-YOLO.
Their contribution emphasised the critical need for robust feature extraction
under challenging low-light conditions, a scenario that conventional YOLO
variants trained on the well-lit COCO dataset frequently failed to handle
gracefully. The authors highlighted the crucial role of aggressive data
augmentation strategies, including brightness and contrast adjustment,
synthetic noise injection, and simulated motion blur.
The augmentation philosophy advocated by Roy and colleagues directly
inspired several of the preprocessing modules in our proposed system. In
particular, our training pipeline incorporates random brightness shifts in the
range of plus-or-minus thirty percent, contrast stretching, hue jitter, and
Gaussian noise injection at multiple intensity levels, all of which collectively
improve model robustness when encountering the unpredictable lighting
conditions of real forest environments. The WilDect-YOLO study also
demonstrated convincingly that domain-specific fine-tuning is essential when
transitioning from generalised pretrained weights to highly specialised
wildlife detection tasks.
11
=== PAGE 23 ===
2.5 Deep Learning for Dynamic Wildlife Monitoring
Mughal and colleagues, writing in IEEE Access in 2025, explored real-
time approaches for dynamic wildlife monitoring in resource-constrained edge
environments. Their work was particularly significant for the present project
because it explicitly highlighted the absolute necessity of integrating
lightweight cloud APIs for immediate edge-to-cloud alert mechanisms. The
authors articulated what they termed a critical operational bottleneck in field
deployments: an artificial-intelligence model is only as useful as the alerting
mechanism that surrounds it. If the AI accurately detects a tiger but the
responsible ranger is not notified immediately due to a lack of network
communication protocols or inadequate alert routing, then the system has
comprehensively failed its core operational objective.
This insight directly drove the deep integration of the Twilio cloud SMS
API in our proposed system, together with a programmatic cooldown logic
that prevents alert flooding while still ensuring timely notification of
operationally significant events. Mughal and colleagues also discussed the
broader question of edge-versus-cloud trade-offs, noting that while edge
inference offers lower end-to-end latency and greater resilience to intermittent
connectivity, it also imposes significant memory and power constraints that
limit the model size that can practically be deployed. Our system follows their
recommended hybrid pattern: edge-side inference for low-latency detection,
combined with cloud-side messaging for reliable alert delivery.
2.6 Comparative Analysis
Table 2.1 summarises the comparative analysis of the principal object-
detection architectures reviewed above, with explicit reference to their
suitability for the present wildlife monitoring application. The analysis
considers four dimensions: computational efficiency, detection accuracy,
12
=== PAGE 24 ===
robustness to occlusion and adverse lighting, and ease of integration with edge
deployment platforms.
Table 2.1 Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Models
Model Strengths Weaknesses Suitability
Extremely high Very slow FPS; needs Low - cannot run on
Faster R-CNN
precision heavy GPU edge devices
Fast inference; good Struggles with small Medium - may miss
SSD
for edge distant objects distant elephants
Excellent speed- Struggles with heavy High but superseded
YOLOv5 / v8
accuracy balance occlusion by v11
YOLOv11 C2PSA attention; Needs careful Optimal - selected
(Proposed) C3k2 deep features augmentation for project
2.7 Research Gaps Identified
Following the comprehensive review of the literature, the following
research gaps have been identified in existing wildlife monitoring approaches,
each of which the present project seeks to address:
• Most existing studies focus exclusively on detection accuracy in
isolation, without integrating a real-time alerting mechanism that can
operationally close the loop between detection and human response.
• Few studies leverage the latest-generation YOLOv11 architecture; the
bulk of existing wildlife detection work is based on YOLOv5,
YOLOv7, or YOLOv8, all of which lack the position-sensitive attention
mechanisms introduced in YOLOv11.
• End-user usability has been largely neglected in academic prototypes;
almost no published work provides a deployable graphical interface that
a non-technical forest guard could realistically operate.
13
=== PAGE 25 ===
• Cooldown and rate-limiting logic for alert dispatch has received almost
no attention in the literature, despite being operationally critical to
prevent notification fatigue.
• Few studies report end-to-end alert latency from frame capture to SMS
delivery, which is arguably the most important practical metric from a
deployment perspective.
14
=== PAGE 26 ===
CHAPTER 3
SYSTEM ANALYSIS AND FEASIBILITY
3.1 Existing System
The methods currently employed for wildlife monitoring along forest
boundaries and for the protection of human settlements from dangerous
animal incursions rely heavily on traditional surveillance paradigms, on
physical barriers, and on non-intelligent sensor networks. While each of these
approaches has played some historical role in mitigating human-wildlife
conflict, none addresses the underlying problem of timely, species-specific,
low-false-alarm detection in a satisfactory manner. A detailed examination of
each existing methodology and its associated limitations is presented below.
3.1.1 Methodologies in Existing Systems
• Manual Patrolling: Forest guards physically walk or drive along the
perimeter in designated shifts, scanning the undergrowth with hand-
held torches, low-resolution night-vision binoculars, or simply unaided
vision. This is the most labour-intensive of all approaches and provides
the lowest geographical coverage per unit cost.
• Trap Cameras: Motion-activated cameras strapped to trees take a burst
of photographs whenever an integrated infrared sensor detects
movement. The captured images are stored locally on a removable SD
card and must be physically retrieved by a guard, often days or weeks
after the event has occurred.
• Basic PIR Motion Sensors: Passive Infrared sensors trigger an alarm
whenever they detect a heat signature crossing their field of view. While
simple and cheap, they cannot distinguish between species and produce
a constant stream of false alarms.
15
=== PAGE 27 ===
• Electric Fencing: Low-voltage electric fences are erected along
sensitive boundaries, designed to deliver a non-lethal but uncomfortable
shock to any animal attempting to cross. Effective in the short term
against smaller species, but routinely destroyed by herds of elephants.
• Acoustic Deterrents: Devices that emit loud, sudden sounds intended to
frighten animals away from sensitive areas. Effectiveness diminishes
rapidly as animals habituate to the sounds.
• Trench Barriers: Physical excavations along the forest boundary,
intended to prevent the passage of large herbivores such as elephants.
Highly effective initially but expensive to maintain and prone to erosion
during the monsoon season.
3.1.2 Drawbacks of the Existing System
The current infrastructure is plagued by several critical and well-
documented inefficiencies, each of which contributes to its overall operational
ineffectiveness:
• High Latency: Trap cameras require forest officials to manually collect
SD cards days or weeks after events have occurred. While valuable for
retrospective ecological research, this provides exactly zero operational
value for immediate intrusion prevention.
• False Alarms: PIR motion sensors trigger alarms in response to falling
leaves, swaying branches, gusts of wind, and the presence of small non-
threatening species. This leads inevitably to alarm fatigue, causing
guards to ignore the sensors entirely.
• High Risk to Human Life: Manual patrolling places human personnel
in direct physical danger. Unexpected encounters with apex predators
such as tigers, or with easily provoked herbivores such as elephants in
musth, frequently result in fatal casualties for under-equipped guards.
16
=== PAGE 28 ===
• Geographical Coverage Limitations: The vastness of typical forest
perimeters, often hundreds of kilometres long, makes simultaneous
monitoring of all vulnerable entry points physically impossible with any
realistic manpower allocation.
• Maintenance Costs: Electric fences are routinely damaged by herds of
elephants. Repairing such fences deep within forested terrain requires
constant, highly expensive maintenance operations involving specialist
personnel.
• Lack of Species Discrimination: Existing automated systems cannot
distinguish between threatening species and non-threatening species,
severely limiting their operational utility.
• No Real-Time Notification: Traditional systems lack any mechanism
for the immediate notification of relevant authorities. Even when an
event is detected, the information remains trapped at the sensor location.
• Power and Connectivity Constraints: Many remote forest locations lack
reliable mains power and cellular connectivity, limiting the deployment
of more sophisticated monitoring infrastructure.
3.2 Proposed System
The proposed system completely replaces the manual effort and the so-
called blind motion sensors of the existing infrastructure with an intelligent,
vision-based artificial intelligence pipeline. It leverages the power of
YOLOv11 for deep semantic feature extraction and the accessibility of
Streamlit for end-user-friendly interaction, providing a complete end-to-end
automated software pipeline from frame capture to ranger notification.
3.2.1 Advantages of the Proposed System
17
=== PAGE 29 ===
• Real-Time Processing: Video frames are processed and analysed in
milliseconds, providing instant situational awareness without any
human intervention. The system maintains an inference rate of
approximately thirty frames per second on commodity hardware.
• Species-Specific Classification: The artificial intelligence possesses
sufficient semantic understanding to distinguish reliably between a
falling leaf, a deer (safe), and a leopard (threat). This effectively
eliminates the false alarms that plague traditional PIR sensors.
• Instantaneous Cloud Alerts: Deep integration with the Twilio cloud
communication API ensures that an SMS is dispatched to the ranger's
mobile device within two to four seconds of threat detection.
• Anti-Spam Cooldown Logic: A programmed session-state cooldown
timer ensures that the ranger receives one critical alert per discrete
event, rather than dozens of redundant text messages while a single
animal lingers in the camera frame.
• Interactive User Interface: A custom Streamlit dashboard allows for
easy starting, stopping, and threshold adjustment of camera feeds
without requiring any coding knowledge.
• Hardware Agnosticism: The system can be deployed on any standard
webcam, IP camera via RTSP, or CCTV stream, making it cost-
effective to integrate with existing infrastructure investments.
• Continuous Twenty-Four-Hour Operation: The system operates
autonomously around the clock, eliminating the need for continuous
human attention and providing surveillance coverage during the high-
risk nocturnal hours when most predator activity occurs.
• Audit Trail and Forensic Logging: Every detection event is logged with
timestamp and confidence score, providing a complete audit trail for
retrospective analysis and ecological research.
18
=== PAGE 30 ===
• Scalability: Multiple camera feeds can be processed concurrently from
a single host machine, enabling cost-effective coverage of large
geographical areas.
• Configurability: All operational parameters are configurable through
the GUI without any code modification.
3.3 Feasibility Study
A comprehensive feasibility study was conducted to ensure that the
proposed system is viable from technical, economic, and operational
standpoints before committing to full-scale implementation. The findings of
each dimension of the feasibility analysis are presented below.
3.3.1 Technical Feasibility
The proposed project is highly technically feasible. It utilises widely
supported, mature, and well-documented open-source libraries throughout,
including Python, the OpenCV computer-vision library, the Ultralytics YOLO
framework, and the Streamlit web-application framework. The Streamlit
library, in particular, provides a remarkably lightweight method for hosting
interactive machine-learning applications locally without requiring the
configuration of complex web servers such as Django, Flask, or Apache. The
Twilio API is a robust, enterprise-grade commercial service with documented
uptime in excess of 99.95 percent and worldwide cellular network coverage
across over one hundred and eighty countries.
Furthermore, all of the deep-learning components used in the project
are well-supported on commodity hardware. The YOLOv11 nano variant,
used for real-time inference, can comfortably exceed thirty frames per second
on a mid-range NVIDIA GPU and remains usable, if slower, even on CPU-
only configurations. The total disk footprint of the trained model weights is
approximately five megabytes, which is trivially small by modern standards.
19
=== PAGE 31 ===
3.3.2 Economic Feasibility
The proposed system is highly economically feasible. The core software
stack, comprising Python, the YOLO framework, OpenCV, Streamlit, and
PyTorch, is entirely free and open-source, incurring zero recurring licence
costs. The Twilio API operates on an affordable pay-per-message pricing
model, typically charging a fraction of a rupee per outbound SMS within
India; furthermore, Twilio offers free trial accounts that are entirely sufficient
for the pilot-testing phase of any deployment.
The hardware requirements are modest. The system requires only a
standard consumer-grade webcam (typical retail cost of approximately one
thousand five hundred Indian rupees) and an existing guardhouse desktop or
laptop computer. There is no requirement to procure proprietary, high-cost
enterprise camera systems or specialist surveillance hardware, which would
otherwise represent a major capital expenditure. The reduction in crop
damage, livestock loss, and human casualties achievable through timely alerts
also provides a substantial and quantifiable economic benefit to local farming
communities.
3.3.3 Operational Feasibility
Operationally, the proposed system is designed from the outset to be a
plug-and-play deployment. Forest guards do not need to understand neural
networks, computer vision, or any other underlying technical concept in order
to operate the software effectively. They simply launch the application by
clicking a desktop shortcut, click the prominent Start Camera button on the
dashboard, and then monitor the resulting video feed. The automatic SMS
dispatch system ensures that even when a guard is temporarily away from the
monitor, they will be notified directly on their personal mobile telephone,
20
=== PAGE 32 ===
making the system genuinely feasible for real-world deployment in
chronically understaffed forest outposts.
3.3.4 Legal and Ethical Feasibility
The system processes only video imagery captured at designated forest
boundary locations and does not collect any personally identifiable
information about human subjects. The captured imagery is processed locally
on the host machine and is not transmitted to any cloud service except in the
form of structured SMS notifications containing only the species name and the
camera identifier. As such, the system raises no significant data-protection
concerns under either the Indian Digital Personal Data Protection Act of 2023
or the comparable legislative frameworks in other jurisdictions. From a
wildlife-protection perspective, the system actively contributes to the
implementation of the Wildlife Protection Act of 1972 by reducing the
incidence of retaliatory killings of protected species.
21
=== PAGE 33 ===
CHAPTER 4
SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
4.1 Hardware Requirements
In order to perform deep-learning inference efficiently and to process
incoming video frames in real time without significant buffering or frame
drops, the proposed system requires the host machine to satisfy a set of
minimum and recommended hardware specifications. The detailed
specifications, together with the rationale for each requirement, are
summarised in Table 4.1 and discussed in the paragraphs below.
Table 4.1 Recommended Hardware Specifications
Component Minimum Recommended
Intel i7 12th Gen / AMD Ryzen
Processor (CPU) Intel i5 8th Gen / AMD Ryzen 5
7
RAM 8 GB DDR4 16 GB DDR4 or higher
Storage 256 GB SSD 512 GB NVMe SSD
GPU (optional) Integrated graphics NVIDIA RTX 3060 with CUDA
Camera 720p USB webcam 1080p IP camera (RTSP)
Network 2G/3G cellular for SMS 4G/5G with backup connection
Mains AC with UPS battery
Power Mains AC 230V
backup
4.1.1 Processor (CPU)
A multi-core processor is strictly required to handle the parallel
background workload of user-interface rendering, frame capture from the
camera buffer, and the inference computations required for object detection.
The minimum recommended processor is an eighth-generation Intel Core i5
or an AMD Ryzen 5 of equivalent generation. Older processors lacking
22
=== PAGE 34 ===
sufficient floating-point throughput will result in noticeably reduced frame
rates and may cause perceptible UI lag during interactive operation.
4.1.2 Memory (RAM)
A minimum of eight gigabytes of system memory is strictly required
for stable continuous operation. Sixteen gigabytes is highly recommended for
smoother video processing and for preventing memory leaks during extended
twenty-four-hour-per-day continuous operation. The YOLOv11 model alone
consumes approximately two gigabytes of memory once loaded, and
additional memory is required for the OpenCV frame buffers and the Streamlit
web server.
4.1.3 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU)
While not strictly mandatory for deployment, an NVIDIA discrete GPU
with CUDA support, such as the GTX 1650, the RTX 3060, or higher, will
increase inference throughput by a factor of approximately ten times during
both training and live inference. For deployments where multiple camera feeds
must be processed concurrently from a single host, a discrete GPU is strongly
recommended.
4.2 Software Requirements
The software environment must be carefully configured with the correct
package versions in order to prevent dependency conflicts between PyTorch,
OpenCV, and Streamlit, all of which evolve rapidly and occasionally
introduce breaking changes between minor version releases. Table 4.2
summarises the verified-compatible software stack used in the present
implementation.
23
=== PAGE 35 ===
Table 4.2 Software Stack and Version Matrix
Component Version Purpose
Windows 10/11 or
Operating System Host platform
Ubuntu 22.04
Python 3.10 or 3.11 Primary language
Streamlit 1.30+ Web dashboard framework
OpenCV-Python 4.8+ Camera and image processing
Ultralytics 8.0+ YOLO model framework
PyTorch 2.0+ Deep learning backend
Twilio Python SDK 8.0+ SMS API client
NumPy 1.26+ Tensor operations
Pillow 10.0+ Image manipulation
CUDA Toolkit (opt) 11.8+ GPU acceleration
4.3 API Specifications (Twilio)
The communication subsystem of the proposed application relies on the
Twilio cloud communication architecture for the dispatch of outbound SMS
notifications. To function correctly, the system requires an active Twilio
account, identified by an Account SID and an associated Authentication
Token, both of which are obtained free of charge from the Twilio web console.
Communication Protocol: All API calls are made over HTTPS using the
POST method against the Twilio REST endpoint at https://api.twilio.com.
Authentication is performed using HTTP Basic Authentication with the
Account SID as the username and the Auth Token as the password.
Payload Format: Form URL-encoded data containing the destination
phone number (To), the source phone number provided by Twilio (From), and
the message body (Body), the latter limited to 1600 characters per message.
Rate Limits: Standard Twilio accounts support sending one message per
second for long-code phone numbers. The internal cooldown timer of the
24
=== PAGE 36 ===
application, defaulting to sixty seconds, naturally prevents the application
from exceeding these rate limits and from triggering carrier-level filtering.
Delivery Latency: Empirical measurement during the testing phase
demonstrated end-to-end delivery latency consistently in the range of two to
four seconds from the moment of detection to the moment of message receipt
on the destination handset.
4.4 Functional Requirements
The functional requirements specify the behaviours that the system
must exhibit. They are summarised in Table 4.3.
Table 4.3 Functional Requirements Summary
ID Functional Requirement
The system shall capture live video frames from a connected USB or IP
FR-01
camera at no less than 25 frames per second.
The system shall apply YOLOv11 inference to each captured frame and
FR-02
produce bounding boxes with class labels and confidence scores.
The system shall draw a red bounding box around any detected harmful animal
FR-03
and a green bounding box around any detected safe animal.
The system shall dispatch an SMS alert via the Twilio API whenever a
FR-04
harmful animal is detected with confidence above the configured threshold.
The system shall enforce a configurable cooldown period between successive
FR-05
SMS dispatches for the same camera.
The system shall provide a static-image-analysis tab that allows the user to
FR-06
upload a still image and obtain detection results.
The system shall expose a slider control allowing the operator to adjust the
FR-07
detection confidence threshold between 0.0 and 1.0.
The system shall log every detection event with timestamp, species name,
FR-08
confidence score, and SMS dispatch status.
25
=== PAGE 37 ===
4.5 Non-Functional Requirements
The non-functional requirements specify the qualitative attributes of the
system. They are summarised in Table 4.4.
Table 4.4 Non-Functional Requirements Summary
Attribute Requirement
Sustained frame processing rate of at least 25 FPS on the
Performance
recommended hardware configuration.
Continuous 24/7 operation without manual restart for periods
Availability
exceeding 168 hours (one week).
End-to-end SMS dispatch success rate of at least 98% under normal
Reliability
cellular coverage.
A non-technical forest guard shall be able to operate the system
Usability
after a one-hour orientation session.
Twilio credentials shall be stored as environment variables and not
Security
hard-coded in source files.
The application shall be installable via a single pip-install command
Maintainability
using a requirements.txt file.
The application shall run unmodified on Windows 10/11 and
Portability
Ubuntu 22.04 LTS.
26
=== PAGE 38 ===
CHAPTER 5
MATHEMATICAL MODELING OF CNNs
5.1 The Convolution Operation
At the very heart of every modern object-detection architecture,
including the YOLOv11 framework employed in the present project, lies the
Convolutional Neural Network. Unlike traditional Artificial Neural Networks,
which flatten an input image into a one-dimensional vector and consequently
destroy all spatial relationships between adjacent pixels, CNNs preserve and
exploit the inherent two-dimensional matrix structure of the image throughout
the entire forward pass. This preservation of spatial structure is the
fundamental architectural insight that has enabled the dramatic advances in
computer vision over the past decade.
The mathematical operation at the core of every convolutional layer is
the discrete two-dimensional convolution, in which a small kernel or filter
matrix is slid systematically across the input image matrix. At each spatial
position, the kernel and the corresponding local region of the input are
combined element-wise and the resulting products are summed to produce a
single scalar value. The collection of all such scalars, indexed by spatial
position, constitutes the output of the convolution and is termed the feature
map. Formally, the convolution operation is defined by the following
expression:
Feature Map(i, j) = (I * K)(i, j) = Σ Σ I(i+m, j+n) · K(m, n)
where I denotes the input image matrix, K denotes the two-dimensional
filter (kernel) matrix, the indices (i, j) refer to the current spatial position in
the output feature map, and the indices (m, n) iterate over the spatial
27
=== PAGE 39 ===
dimensions of the kernel. The summation is taken over the entire support of
the kernel.
Crucially, the elements of the kernel are not manually programmed by
the system designer. Instead, the kernel weights are initialised randomly and
then learned automatically during the training phase through gradient descent.
As training progresses, the lower-layer kernels typically converge to detectors
of low-level visual primitives such as oriented edges, simple textures, and
colour gradients; the middle-layer kernels combine these primitives into mid-
level patterns such as fur textures, eye-like circular structures, and limb-like
elongated shapes; and the highest-layer kernels combine the mid-level patterns
into complete object-class detectors capable of identifying entire animals such
as tigers, leopards, and elephants.
5.1.1 Stride, Padding, and Receptive Field
Three additional hyperparameters fundamentally shape the behaviour
of every convolutional layer. The stride controls the step size with which the
kernel is moved across the input; a stride of one produces a dense output,
whereas a stride of two halves the spatial resolution of the output and is
commonly used for spatial downsampling. The padding specifies how the
boundaries of the input are handled; zero-padding preserves spatial
dimensions, while valid (no) padding causes the output to shrink relative to
the input. The receptive field of any neuron in a deep layer specifies the region
of the input image that ultimately influences the activation of that neuron and
grows progressively with depth.
5.2 Activation Functions
Following each convolutional or fully-connected layer, the output is
passed through an element-wise non-linear activation function before being
forwarded to the next layer. The role of this non-linearity is critical: without
28
=== PAGE 40 ===
it, no matter how many deep layers are stacked, the entire network would be
mathematically equivalent to a single linear transformation, and would
therefore be incapable of representing any non-linear relationship between
input and output. The introduction of non-linearity is what gives deep
networks their celebrated capacity to model complex hierarchical concepts.
YOLOv11, like several other recent state-of-the-art architectures,
makes heavy use of the SiLU (Sigmoid Linear Unit) activation function,
which is also known in some contexts as the Swish function. The SiLU
function is defined as the element-wise product of the input with the sigmoid
of the input:
f(x) = x · σ(x) = x / (1 + e⁻ˣ)
The SiLU function has several attractive properties relative to the older
Rectified Linear Unit. It is smooth and differentiable everywhere, including at
the origin (whereas ReLU has a kink at zero); it allows a small amount of
negative information to pass through, which prevents the so-called dying
ReLU problem in which neurons can become permanently inactive when their
pre-activation value is consistently negative; and empirical studies have
demonstrated that networks trained with SiLU activation typically achieve
marginally higher accuracy on standard image-classification benchmarks than
otherwise identical networks trained with ReLU.
5.3 Loss Functions in YOLO
Training any deep neural network requires a quantitative measure of
how wrong the network is on each training example. This measure, termed the
loss function, is what gradient descent acts to minimise. The YOLO family of
architectures employs a composite loss function that simultaneously addresses
three distinct sub-tasks: bounding-box localisation, objectness prediction, and
29
=== PAGE 41 ===
class identification. The total loss is given by the weighted sum of three
component losses:
Total Loss = L_box + L_obj + L_cls
5.3.1 Bounding Box Regression Loss
YOLOv11 employs the Complete Intersection over Union (CIoU) loss
for bounding-box regression. Unlike the older Mean Squared Error
formulation, CIoU computes not only the spatial overlap between the
predicted and ground-truth boxes (the standard IoU), but additionally
penalises differences in the centre-point distance between the boxes and
differences in the aspect ratio. The full formulation is:
L_CIoU = 1 - IoU + ρ²(b, b_gt) / c² + α · v
where ρ denotes the Euclidean distance between the centre points of the
predicted box and the ground-truth box, c denotes the diagonal length of the
smallest enclosing box that contains both, and v is an aspect-ratio consistency
term scaled by the trade-off parameter α. This composite formulation produces
tighter, more stable bounding-box predictions than the simpler IoU loss alone.
5.3.2 Objectness Loss
The objectness loss employs the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE)
formulation to determine, for each grid cell, the model's confidence that any
object at all is present within the cell. The BCE loss is mathematically given
by:
L_BCE = -[y · log(p) + (1 - y) · log(1 - p)]
where y is the binary ground-truth label and p is the predicted
probability. The BCE loss is preferred over Mean Squared Error in this context
because it produces stronger gradient signals when the predicted probability
is far from the true value, leading to faster convergence.
30
=== PAGE 42 ===
5.3.3 Classification Loss
The classification loss also employs the Binary Cross Entropy
formulation, computed independently for each possible class. This approach
treats classification as a set of binary decisions rather than as a single multi-
class softmax decision, which has the practical advantage of allowing a single
bounding box to be assigned to multiple classes simultaneously when this is
appropriate.
5.4 Backpropagation and Optimization
To minimise the total loss, the network employs an optimisation
algorithm to iteratively update the weights of every kernel and every fully-
connected layer. The two most commonly used optimisers in modern deep
learning are Stochastic Gradient Descent with Momentum and Adam (or its
weight-decoupled variant AdamW). YOLOv11 uses AdamW by default, with
an initial learning rate of 0.01 and cosine annealing decay across the training
run.
The gradient of the loss function with respect to every learnable weight
in the network is computed automatically using the chain rule of multivariable
calculus, in an algorithm universally known as backpropagation. The general
weight update rule, in its simplest form, is given by:
W_new = W_old - η · (∂L / ∂W)
where W denotes any single weight in the network, L denotes the loss,
and η denotes the learning rate. This update is applied iteratively across many
epochs (full passes through the training dataset), with each epoch typically
consisting of thousands of mini-batches of training examples. For the present
project, the YOLOv11 model was fine-tuned for one hundred epochs on the
curated wildlife dataset, with early stopping triggered if the validation loss
failed to improve for twenty consecutive epochs.
31
=== PAGE 43 ===
5.4.1 Learning Rate Scheduling
The learning rate is arguably the single most important hyperparameter
in any deep-learning training pipeline. Setting it too high causes the
optimisation trajectory to diverge or oscillate, while setting it too low causes
training to converge unacceptably slowly. Modern training pipelines,
including the one employed in the present project, use a learning-rate
scheduler that automatically adjusts the learning rate over the course of
training. The cosine annealing schedule, used here, smoothly decays the
learning rate from its initial value to a small terminal value following a cosine
curve.
5.4.2 Regularisation Techniques
To prevent overfitting on the training dataset, the YOLOv11 training
pipeline employs several regularisation techniques in concert. Weight decay
(L2 regularisation) penalises large weight magnitudes, encouraging the model
to favour simpler, smoother solutions. Dropout, applied to selected fully-
connected layers, randomly disables neurons during training to prevent co-
adaptation. Batch normalisation, applied after every convolutional layer,
normalises activations to zero mean and unit variance, improving training
stability and acting as a mild regulariser. Together, these techniques ensure
that the trained model generalises well from the training dataset to previously
unseen forest imagery.
32
=== PAGE 44 ===
CHAPTER 6
SYSTEM DESIGN AND ARCHITECTURE
6.1 System Architecture Design
The system architecture, illustrated conceptually in Figure 6.1,
represents the high-level structural design of all software and hardware
components that interact within the deployment environment. The pipeline
operates as an asynchronous loop in which video frames flow continuously
from the camera hardware, through the deep-learning inference engine, into
the user interface, and onward to the cloud-based alerting subsystem.
The workflow begins at the physical camera hardware, where photons
reflected from the scene are converted by the image sensor into digital
matrices of pixel intensity values. These matrices are passed to the operating
system's video buffers, from which they are grabbed by OpenCV using the
VideoCapture interface. Each captured frame is then resized (typically to 640
by 640 pixels, which is the input dimension expected by the YOLOv11
backbone) and forwarded to the YOLOv11 neural network. The network
produces a set of bounding-box predictions, each tagged with a class label and
a confidence score.
The Streamlit backend then evaluates each detected class against a hard-
coded array of harmful animal species. If the detected class is found in this
array, the bounding box is drawn in red on the frame; otherwise it is drawn in
green. The annotated frame is then rendered into the live video stream
displayed on the dashboard. In parallel, if a harmful animal has been detected
and the cooldown period has elapsed since the most recent SMS dispatch, the
system constructs an alert message and dispatches it asynchronously to the
Twilio API endpoint, which in turn relays it to the registered cellular handset
of the responsible forest ranger.
33
=== PAGE 45 ===
6.1.1 Modular Decomposition
The application is decomposed into the following five logical modules,
each with clearly defined inputs, outputs, and responsibilities:
• Camera Module: Responsible for opening the video device, configuring
resolution and frame rate, and yielding successive frames as NumPy
arrays.
• Preprocessing Module: Responsible for resizing each frame to the 640-
by-640 input dimension required by the YOLOv11 backbone and for
any colour-space conversion required.
• Inference Module: Wraps the loaded YOLOv11 model and provides a
simple predict-frame API that returns a list of detection objects (each
containing bounding-box coordinates, class label, and confidence).
• Alert Module: Encapsulates the Twilio client, the cooldown logic, and
the message-construction templates. Exposes a single send-alert method
that internally enforces all rate-limiting constraints.
• UI Module: Built on Streamlit, responsible for rendering the dashboard,
capturing user configuration changes, displaying the live annotated
video stream, and presenting alert toast notifications.
Figure 6.1 : Modular Decomposition of the Forest Guard AI System
34
=== PAGE 46 ===
6.2 Unified Modeling Language (UML) Diagrams
To formalise the design of the system and to enable rigorous
communication between the development team and the project supervisor, a
comprehensive set of Unified Modeling Language diagrams was prepared.
The most important of these diagrams are described in detail below.
6.2.1 Use Case Diagram
The Use Case diagram, shown in Figure 6.2, captures the functional
requirements of the system from the perspective of its actors. The diagram
identifies three actors: the Forest Ranger (the primary human user), the
Camera Sensor (a hardware actor that continuously feeds video frames into
the system), and the Twilio Cloud (an external system actor responsible for
SMS delivery).
Figure 6.2 : Forest Guard AI Use Case DIagram
The principal use cases include: Upload Static Image (allowing the
ranger to analyse a still image captured by an external camera trap); Start Live
Camera (engaging the live video surveillance mode); Adjust Confidence
Threshold (modifying the operating sensitivity of the detector); View
35
=== PAGE 47 ===
Bounding Boxes (observing the annotated video stream in real time); and
Receive SMS Alert (the use case that completes the loop between detection
and human response). Each of these use cases interacts with one or more of
the system's internal modules in well-defined ways.
6.2.2 Activity Diagram
The Activity diagram, shown in Figure 6.3, models the flow of control
from one activity to the next during normal live surveillance operation. The
flow proceeds as follows:
1. System initialised and YOLOv11 model weights loaded into RAM.
2. User selects the Live Surveillance tab on the dashboard.
3. User toggles the Start Camera control.
4. Loop begins: read frame from camera, pass frame to YOLOv11
inference engine.
5. Decision: Was any animal detected? If no, render the unmodified frame
and return to step 4.
6. Decision: Is the detected animal classified as harmful? If no, draw a
green bounding box and continue.
7. Otherwise, draw a red bounding box.
8. Decision: Is the SMS cooldown timer currently active? If yes, render
the annotated frame and return to step 4.
9. Otherwise, dispatch an SMS alert via Twilio, reset the cooldown timer,
render the frame, and return to step 4.
36
=== PAGE 48 ===
Figure 6.2.2 : Live Surveiliance Activity Diagram
6.2.3 Sequence Diagram
The Sequence diagram, shown in Figure 6.4, captures the chronological
sequence of messages exchanged between the principal system objects during
the processing of a single video frame in which a harmful animal is detected.
The diagram begins with the StreamlitUI object requesting a frame from the
CameraHardware object and proceeds through each subsequent message
exchange until the SMS has been dispatched and the annotated frame has been
displayed to the user.
The exchange proceeds as follows. The StreamlitUI requests a frame
from the CameraHardware. The CameraHardware returns a NumPy array
containing the raw BGR pixel matrix. The StreamlitUI passes this array to the
YOLOModel object via the predict method. The YOLOModel returns a list of
detection objects, each of which carries the bounding-box coordinates, the
class label, and the confidence score. The StreamlitUI passes these detections
to the AlertManager. The AlertManager evaluates each detection against the
harmful-animals list and the cooldown timer, then asynchronously dispatches
37
=== PAGE 49 ===
a POST request to the TwilioAPI endpoint when alerting is warranted. Finally,
the StreamlitUI paints the annotated frame to the browser.
6.3 Data Flow Diagram
The Data Flow Diagram, shown in Figure 6.5 across two levels of
abstraction, depicts the movement of data through the system. The Level-0
(context) diagram shows the system as a single process exchanging data with
three external entities: the Camera (source of video frames), the Forest Ranger
(source of configuration changes and recipient of alerts), and the Twilio Cloud
(destination of SMS dispatch requests).
The Level-1 diagram decomposes the central process into its five
constituent modules, namely the Camera Module, Preprocessing Module,
Inference Module, Alert Module, and UI Module, and shows the data flows
between them. Frames flow from Camera Module to Preprocessing Module
as raw BGR arrays; from Preprocessing Module to Inference Module as
resized RGB tensors; and from Inference Module to UI Module and Alert
Module in parallel, carrying the detection results. Configuration parameters
flow from UI Module to Alert Module and to Inference Module, while alert
payloads flow from Alert Module out to the Twilio Cloud entity.
38
=== PAGE 50 ===
Figure 6.3 : Level - 1 Data Flow Diagram (DFD)
39
=== PAGE 51 ===
CHAPTER 7
DATASET PREPARATION AND AUGMENTATION
7.1 Dataset Acquisition
A robust and representative training dataset is the indispensable
foundation of any deep-learning project, and the well-known principle of
garbage in, garbage out applies with particular force to object-detection tasks
where the model must learn to discriminate among visually similar species
across a wide range of environmental conditions. For the present project, a
custom-curated dataset comprising several thousand annotated images of the
target species was assembled from a combination of open-source repositories,
public ecology databases, and field-collected imagery.
The principal sources from which the dataset was assembled include:
the publicly available Kaggle Wild Animals image collections, which
provided thousands of high-quality photographs of tigers, leopards, lions,
bears, and elephants across diverse habitats; the Common Objects in Context
(COCO) dataset, from which animal-class subsets were extracted; the
iNaturalist platform, which contributed species-verified photographs
uploaded by amateur naturalists worldwide; and the Caltech Camera Traps
dataset, which provided realistic camera-trap-style imagery captured under
natural lighting conditions in genuine wilderness settings. In addition, several
hundred frames were extracted from publicly licensed wildlife documentary
footage to ensure adequate representation of motion-blurred and partially
occluded subjects.
The final dataset, after deduplication and quality filtering, comprised
approximately twelve thousand training images, two thousand validation
images, and one thousand held-out test images, distributed across the six target
classes (tiger, leopard, bear, elephant, lion, cheetah) and four negative or
40
=== PAGE 52 ===
distractor classes (deer, wild boar, monkey, empty forest background). The
class distribution statistics are summarised in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1 Dataset Class Distribution Statistics
Class Train Validation Test
Tiger 1500 250 125
Leopard 1450 240 120
Bear 1300 220 110
Elephant 1600 260 130
Lion 1200 200 100
Cheetah 1100 190 95
Deer (safe) 1400 230 115
Wild Boar 900 160 80
Monkey 950 160 80
Background 600 90 45
Total 12,000 2,000 1,000
7.2 Annotation and Formatting
The YOLO family of object-detection algorithms requires annotation
files in a very specific text-based format. For each image in the dataset, a
corresponding plain-text file with the same base filename and the .txt
extension must be present, containing one line per annotated bounding box.
Each line consists of five space-separated values, formatted as follows:
<object-class-id> <x-centre> <y-centre> <width> <height>
All four of the spatial values must be normalised to the closed interval
zero to one by dividing the corresponding pixel values by the image
dimensions. This normalised representation has the considerable practical
advantage of being invariant to subsequent image resizing operations,
allowing the same annotation file to be used regardless of whether the source
41
=== PAGE 53 ===
image is fed into the network at 640 by 640 pixels, at 320 by 320 pixels, or at
any other resolution.
For the unannotated portion of the dataset, the open-source tools
Roboflow (web-based) and LabelImg (desktop-based) were employed to
manually draw bounding boxes around each animal of interest. The annotation
effort consumed approximately one hundred and twenty person-hours across
three team members and was the most labour-intensive single phase of the
entire project. Each annotated image was independently verified by a second
team member to minimise annotation errors, with disagreements resolved
through consensus discussion.
7.2.1 Dataset YAML Configuration
The Ultralytics YOLO framework requires a YAML configuration file
that specifies the locations of the training, validation, and test image folders,
the number of classes, and the class names. The configuration file used in the
present project is structured as follows:
# wildlife_data.yaml
path: /home/user/wildlife_dataset
train: images/train
val: images/val
test: images/test
nc: 10 # number of classes
names:
0: tiger
1: leopard
2: bear
3: elephant
4: lion
5: cheetah
6: deer
7: boar
8: monkey
9: background
42
=== PAGE 54 ===
7.3 Data Augmentation Strategy
Wildlife surveillance is an extremely challenging computer-vision task
because of the inherent unpredictability of natural environments. A camera
mounted on a forest boundary may face glaring direct sunlight at noon, deep
shadowed darkness at dusk, torrential monsoon rain in July, and dense early-
morning mist in November. To make the trained model invariant to all of these
environmental variations, an aggressive programme of data augmentation was
applied to the training dataset during every training epoch.
7.3.1 Photometric Distortion
Photometric distortion involves the random alteration of the colour and
brightness properties of training images while preserving the underlying
spatial structure. The specific photometric transformations applied during
training include: random adjustment of hue within plus-or-minus fifteen
degrees on the colour wheel; random saturation scaling between 0.7 and 1.3;
random brightness scaling between 0.7 and 1.3; and the injection of Gaussian
noise with a standard deviation up to 0.05. Together, these augmentations
simulate the effects of varying lighting conditions, camera sensor noise, and
atmospheric haze, all of which are encountered routinely in real forest
deployments.
7.3.2 Geometric Distortion
Geometric distortion involves spatial transformations of the image. The
transformations applied during training include: random horizontal flipping
with probability 0.5, which is essential for teaching the network that an animal
facing left is the same species as the same animal facing right; random rotation
by up to plus-or-minus fifteen degrees; random scaling by a factor between
0.5 and 1.5; and random translation by up to ten percent of the image
dimensions. Vertical flipping is deliberately excluded from the augmentation
43
=== PAGE 55 ===
pipeline because animals are essentially never observed in the upside-down
orientation in nature.
7.3.3 Mosaic Augmentation
Mosaic augmentation, originally introduced as part of the YOLOv4 bag
of freebies, is a particularly powerful augmentation technique in which four
entirely distinct training images are cropped, resized, and stitched together
into a single composite image arranged in a two-by-two grid. The bounding-
box annotations of all four source images are correspondingly adjusted to the
coordinates of the composite. This forces the neural network to identify
objects at significantly smaller scales than would be present in a single full-
resolution image, and it prevents the network from over-relying on the global
background context of any single training example.
Mosaic augmentation is applied with probability 1.0 during the early
epochs of training and is gradually phased out during the final ten epochs (a
process known as mosaic cool-down), which has been empirically shown to
improve final convergence and generalisation. Table 7.2 summarises the
complete set of augmentation techniques and their associated probabilities.
44
=== PAGE 56 ===
Table 7.2 Augmentation Techniques and Probabilities
Technique Probability Range
Hue jitter 1.0 ±15°
Saturation scaling 1.0 [0.7, 1.3]
Brightness scaling 1.0 [0.7, 1.3]
Gaussian noise 0.5 σ ≤ 0.05
Horizontal flip 0.5 Mirror axis = vertical
Random rotation 0.7 ±15°
Random scale 1.0 [0.5, 1.5]
Random translation 0.5 ±10% of dim
Mosaic (4-image) 1.0 → 0.0 Phased out last 10 epochs
45
=== PAGE 57 ===
CHAPTER 8
METHODOLOGY AND DEEP LEARNING FRAMEWORK
8.1 YOLOv11 Algorithm Deep Dive
YOLOv11, released by Ultralytics in late 2024 and adopted as the
detection backbone of the present project, represents the latest state-of-the-art
iteration in the You Only Look Once family of object-detection architectures.
It introduces several critical architectural improvements over its immediate
predecessors YOLOv8 and YOLOv10, with a particular focus on improved
inference speed and on substantially better detection accuracy for small or
partially occluded objects, both of which are highly relevant to the wildlife
monitoring use-case.
The overall network is conventionally divided into three sequential
macro-components: the backbone (responsible for extracting hierarchical
visual features from the input image); the neck (responsible for aggregating
and refining the multi-scale features produced by the backbone); and the head
(responsible for producing the final bounding-box and classification
predictions). Each of these macro-components is examined in detail in the
subsections below.
8.1.1 The Backbone Architecture
The backbone is the principal feature-extraction subnetwork. It receives
the raw 640-by-640-pixel input image and processes it through a deeply
stacked sequence of convolutional layers to produce a high-dimensional
feature map in which spatially nearby activations correspond to spatially
nearby image regions and channel-wise activations correspond to learned
semantic concepts. YOLOv11 employs a heavily modified variant of the
CSPDarknet architecture originally introduced in YOLOv4.
46
=== PAGE 58 ===
The most important architectural innovation in the YOLOv11 backbone
is the introduction of so-called C3k2 blocks, which are Cross Stage Partial
network blocks with advanced kernel optimisations. These blocks extract
multi-scale features while carefully minimising gradient information loss
during the backpropagation training phase, an issue that previously plagued
very deep networks. Furthermore, the backbone employs a Spatial Pyramid
Pooling Fast (SPPF) layer immediately before the transition to the neck. The
SPPF layer pools features at three different spatial scales using max-pooling
kernels of size five, nine, and thirteen, and concatenates the results, ensuring
that an elephant occupying the entire frame is recognised just as effectively as
an elephant occupying only a small portion of the frame at considerable
distance from the camera.
8.1.2 The Neck Architecture
The neck of the network sits between the backbone and the head, and is
responsible for aggregating the multi-scale features extracted by the backbone
into a unified representation suitable for downstream detection. YOLOv11
incorporates highly advanced C2PSA blocks, which stand for Cross Stage
Partial with Position-Sensitive Attention. The introduction of attention
mechanisms into the YOLO family represents a substantial leap forward in
detection capability.
The C2PSA block allows the neural network to mathematically focus
its computational resources strictly on important regions of the image (such as
the distinctive striped texture of leopard fur, the characteristic curved shape of
an elephant's trunk, or the unique facial structure of a bear) while actively
ignoring background distractors such as moving leaves, dirt paths, sky regions,
and rain droplets. Mathematically, the attention mechanism computes a set of
query, key, and value projections of the input feature map; takes the dot
product of each query with every key to produce attention weights; normalises
47
=== PAGE 59 ===
these weights using the softmax function; and uses the resulting normalised
weights to compute a weighted sum of the value projections.
8.1.3 The Prediction Head
The head performs the final, dense predictions based on the refined
feature maps produced by the neck. YOLOv11 features decoupled separated
heads, which is to say that the classification task and the regression task are
handled by entirely separate sub-networks rather than by a shared output. This
decoupling has been empirically shown to improve performance on both tasks,
presumably because the gradient signals required for accurate localisation and
accurate classification are sufficiently different that they benefit from
independent parameter sets.
• Classification Head: This neural pathway determines what the detected
object is, that is, the species identification. It outputs a probability
distribution across all known target classes.
• Regression Head: This neural pathway determines where the detected
object is. It outputs the exact bounding-box coordinates: the x-centre,
y-centre, width, and height, all expressed as fractions of the image
dimensions.
• Objectness Head: A small auxiliary head that produces a single scalar
per anchor location, indicating the model's overall confidence that any
object at all is present at that location.
8.2 Grad-CAM Explainable AI (XAI)
Deep neural networks are notoriously, and sometimes pejoratively,
considered to be black boxes. While they routinely provide highly accurate
predictions, it is in general extremely difficult, and in many cases practically
impossible, to determine exactly why a given network made a given decision
on a given input. In mission-critical deployments such as wildlife tracking,
48
=== PAGE 60 ===
where false negatives may translate directly into preventable human
casualties, it is of paramount importance to be able to verify the integrity of
the trained model and to detect cases in which the network may have learned
to exploit spurious correlations in the training data rather than the genuine
semantic features of the target classes.
Grad-CAM (Gradient-weighted Class Activation Mapping), introduced
by Selvaraju and colleagues in 2017, is the most widely used Explainable AI
technique for convolutional neural networks. It operates by visualising which
spatial regions of the input image most strongly influenced the final prediction
of any given target class.
• Gradient Extraction: The Grad-CAM algorithm captures the gradients
flowing into the final convolutional layer of the network just before the
prediction head, with respect to the predicted score for the target class.
• Weight Calculation: The algorithm then mathematically computes the
importance of each feature-map channel by global-average-pooling the
captured gradients across all spatial locations within that channel.
• Heatmap Generation: A weighted sum of the feature maps is computed
using the channel importance weights derived in the previous step. A
ReLU is applied to suppress negative contributions, and the result is
upsampled to the input image resolution and overlaid on the original
image as a colour-coded heatmap.
In the resulting heatmap visualisation, hot colours such as red and
yellow indicate regions of the image that the network identified as highly
relevant to the prediction, whereas cool colours such as blue indicate regions
that contributed little to the prediction. This visual diagnostic tool allows the
project team to verify that the trained YOLOv11 model is genuinely
identifying tigers by attending to their distinctive striped flanks and to their
faces, rather than merely memorising the typical green forest background
49
=== PAGE 61 ===
against which tigers are most often photographed in training data, a failure
mode that has been documented in earlier wildlife-detection studies.
8.3 Integration Technologies
8.3.1 Streamlit Web Framework
Streamlit is an open-source Python framework purpose-designed for
building custom web applications around machine-learning and data-science
workloads. It abstracts away virtually all of the conventional web-
development complexity, including HTML markup, CSS styling, and
JavaScript event handling, enabling developers to construct highly reactive,
aesthetically pleasing user interfaces purely through Python scripting.
In the present project, Streamlit functions are used extensively. The
function st.image() handles automatic image rendering with appropriate
scaling and aspect-ratio preservation; st.sidebar provides a docked panel
containing all of the configuration controls for the Forest Guard dashboard;
st.tabs creates the tabbed interface separating static-image analysis from live
surveillance; and st.session_state provides persistent storage for the cooldown
timer across the script re-runs that are characteristic of Streamlit's reactive
execution model. Because Streamlit re-runs the entire script on every user
interaction, careful session-state management is essential to handle continuous
video loops correctly without losing the cooldown state on each frame update.
8.3.2 Twilio Communication API
Twilio is a leading cloud Communications Platform as a Service
(CPaaS) provider, founded in 2008 and now serving over a quarter-million
developers worldwide. By importing the Client class from the twilio.rest
50
=== PAGE 62 ===
Python package, the application backend can natively interact with global
telecommunication networks over secure REST APIs, completely abstracting
away the underlying complexities of SMS gateway protocols and inter-carrier
routing.
In the present application, the system securely passes the Account SID
and Auth Token, both of which are configured as environment variables for
security, to the Twilio Client constructor. It then invokes the
client.messages.create() method, which constructs the appropriate JSON
payload, signs it using the supplied credentials, and dispatches it to the Twilio
servers over HTTPS. The Twilio infrastructure then routes the SMS message
to the appropriate national carrier based on the destination number, ultimately
delivering the physical SMS to the ranger's registered cellular handset within
a few seconds.
8.3.3 OpenCV for Image Processing
OpenCV (Open Source Computer Vision Library) is the de facto
standard library for low-level image and video processing in Python. In the
present application, OpenCV is responsible for opening the connection to the
camera hardware via the VideoCapture class; for reading individual frames
into NumPy arrays via the read method; for converting the captured frames
from OpenCV's native BGR colour ordering to the RGB ordering expected by
both Streamlit and PyTorch using the cvtColor function; and for drawing the
annotated bounding boxes and class labels onto the frames using the rectangle
and putText functions.
51
=== PAGE 63 ===
CHAPTER 9
IMPLEMENTATION AND SOURCE CODE
9.1 Training Implementation Details
Before the main surveillance application can be deployed and operated,
the YOLOv11 detection model must first be trained on the curated wildlife
dataset described in Chapter 7. The training process is executed using a
dedicated Python script that leverages the Ultralytics framework's high-level
training API. The complete structure of this training script is presented below,
with explanatory comments interspersed throughout.
# train_model.py
# Wildlife Monitoring System - YOLOv11 Training Script
from ultralytics import YOLO
def train_wildlife_model():
# Load the base YOLOv11 nano model checkpoint
# for fast edge inference deployment
model = YOLO('yolo11n.pt')
# Fine-tune the model on the custom wildlife dataset
# using the available CUDA GPU for 100 epochs
results = model.train(
data='wildlife_data.yaml',
epochs=100,
imgsz=640,
batch=16,
device=0, # 0 = primary CUDA GPU
patience=20, # early stopping window
optimizer='AdamW',
lr0=0.01, # initial learning rate
cos_lr=True, # cosine LR schedule
weight_decay=0.0005,
mosaic=1.0,
close_mosaic=10 # cool-down last 10 epochs
)
print('Training complete. Weights saved at:')
52
=== PAGE 64 ===
print('runs/detect/train/weights/best.pt')
if __name__ == '__main__':
train_wildlife_model()
The training script is invoked from the command line, and produces,
upon successful completion, a binary checkpoint file named best.pt in the
runs/detect/train/weights/ directory. This checkpoint file contains the learned
weights of all the convolutional kernels and fully-connected layers in the
network, and is the single artefact that must be transferred to the deployment
machine in order to enable inference. The total training time on an NVIDIA
RTX 3060 GPU was approximately twelve hours.
9.2 The Main Application Pipeline
The core operational logic of the surveillance system resides in a single-
file architecture, conventionally named wildlife_alert.py. The application uses
the @st.cache_resource decorator to ensure that the substantial YOLOv11
model is loaded into RAM only once at startup, thereby preventing severe
memory leaks and avoiding UI freezing during the hot-reload events that occur
whenever the user adjusts a configuration control.
9.2.1 Configuration and Imports
# wildlife_alert.py
import streamlit as st
from ultralytics import YOLO
import cv2
from twilio.rest import Client
import time
from datetime import datetime
from PIL import Image
import numpy as np
import os
# 1. CONFIGURATION & SETTINGS
st.set_page_config(
page_title='Forest Guard AI',
53
=== PAGE 65 ===
page_icon='Tiger',
layout='wide')
# Twilio API credentials
TWILIO_SID = os.getenv('TWILIO_SID', '')
TWILIO_AUTH_TOKEN = os.getenv('TWILIO_AUTH', '')
FROM_PHONE = os.getenv('TWILIO_FROM', '')
TO_PHONE = os.getenv('RANGER_PHONE', '')
# Animals classified as harmful
HARMFUL_ANIMALS = [
'tiger', 'leopard', 'bear',
'elephant', 'lion', 'cheetah']
9.2.2 Model Loading
@st.cache_resource
def load_model():
try:
return YOLO('best.pt')
except Exception as e:
st.error(f'Model load failed: {e}')
return None
model = load_model()
9.2.3 Sidebar Control Panel
st.sidebar.title('Control Panel')
if model:
st.sidebar.success('Model Loaded: best.pt')
else:
st.sidebar.error('Model NOT found!')
confidence = st.sidebar.slider(
'Confidence Threshold', 0.0, 1.0, 0.25, 0.05)
enable_sms = st.sidebar.checkbox(
'Enable SMS Alerts', value=False)
cooldown = st.sidebar.number_input(
'SMS Cooldown (seconds)', value=60)
st.title('Smart Wildlife Surveillance System')
if not model:
st.error('System halted. Missing weights.')
54
=== PAGE 66 ===
st.stop()
if 'last_alert' not in st.session_state:
st.session_state.last_alert = 0
tab1, tab2 = st.tabs([
'Static Image Analysis',
'Live Video Surveillance'])
9.2.4 Static Image Analysis Tab
with tab1:
st.markdown('Upload an image from camera traps.')
uploaded = st.file_uploader(
'Upload an image...',
type=['jpg', 'png', 'jpeg'])
if uploaded:
col1, col2 = st.columns(2)
image_pil = Image.open(uploaded)
with col1:
st.image(image_pil, caption='Original',
use_column_width=True)
if st.button('Initialize Deep Analysis'):
results = model.predict(
image_pil, conf=confidence)
res_bgr = results[0].plot()
res_rgb = cv2.cvtColor(
res_bgr, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
with col2:
st.image(res_rgb, caption='Detection',
use_column_width=True)
detected = [
model.names[int(b.cls[0])]
for b in results[0].boxes]
threats = [n for n in detected
if any(h in n.lower()
for h in HARMFUL_ANIMALS)]
if threats:
55
=== PAGE 67 ===
st.error(f'DANGER: {set(threats)}')
elif detected:
st.success(f'Safe: {set(detected)}')
else:
st.warning('No wildlife detected.')
9.2.5 Live Video Surveillance Tab
with tab2:
st.header('Real-Time Autonomous Feed')
run_cam = st.checkbox('Engage Camera Sensor')
st_frame = st.empty()
if run_cam:
cap = cv2.VideoCapture(0)
client = (Client(TWILIO_SID, TWILIO_AUTH_TOKEN)
if enable_sms else None)
while run_cam:
ret, frame = cap.read()
if not ret:
st.error('Camera buffer fault.')
break
results = model.predict(
frame, conf=confidence, verbose=False)
for result in results:
for box in result.boxes:
x1, y1, x2, y2 = map(
int, box.xyxy[0])
name = model.names[
int(box.cls[0])]
conf = float(box.conf[0])
is_threat = any(
h in name.lower()
for h in HARMFUL_ANIMALS)
color = ((0,0,255) if is_threat
else (0,255,0))
label = f'{name} {conf:.2f}'
cv2.rectangle(frame,
(x1,y1), (x2,y2), color, 3)
56
=== PAGE 68 ===
cv2.putText(frame, label,
(x1, y1-10),
cv2.FONT_HERSHEY_SIMPLEX,
0.6, color, 2)
# SMS Dispatch with cooldown
if is_threat and enable_sms:
now = time.time()
gap = (now -
st.session_state.last_alert)
if gap > cooldown and client:
try:
client.messages.create(
body=f'ALERT: {name}',
from_=FROM_PHONE,
to=TO_PHONE)
st.session_state.
last_alert = now
except Exception:
pass
frame_rgb = cv2.cvtColor(
frame, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB)
st_frame.image(frame_rgb,
channels='RGB',
use_column_width=True)
time.sleep(0.01)
cap.release()
The complete source listing above represents a fully functional,
deployable wildlife surveillance application in approximately one hundred
and forty lines of Python code. The brevity and clarity of the implementation
are largely attributable to the high-level abstractions provided by the Streamlit,
Ultralytics, and Twilio libraries, each of which encapsulates substantial
underlying complexity behind clean Python APIs.
57
=== PAGE 69 ===
CHAPTER 10
SOFTWARE TESTING AND QUALITY ASSURANCE
10.1 Testing Strategy
Software testing is a critical phase of the development life-cycle,
ensuring that the deliverable system is free from catastrophic defects, that it
handles edge cases gracefully, and that it performs reliably under sustained
operational load. The wildlife monitoring system underwent a structured,
multi-tiered testing programme designed to validate every component of the
application from the lowest level to the highest level. The principal tiers of the
testing strategy are described in detail in the subsections below.
10.1.1 Unit Testing
Unit testing involves the systematic verification of individual
components of the codebase in isolation, with all external dependencies
mocked or stubbed to ensure that the test outcome depends solely on the
behaviour of the unit under test. The principal units validated through unit
testing in the present project include the following:
• Model Loading Module: Verified that the load_model function
correctly catches FileNotFoundError exceptions when the best.pt file is
deleted or renamed, returning None and triggering an appropriate error
banner in the UI rather than crashing the entire application.
• Color Space Correction Module: Tested the cv2.cvtColor function in
isolation. Initial development versions produced Smurf-like blue-tinted
images due to OpenCV's default BGR colour ordering being passed
unmodified to Streamlit, which expects RGB. The unit test confirmed
that the cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB conversion code correctly reorders
the channels.
58
=== PAGE 70 ===
• Threat Filter Module: Verified that the list comprehension separating
threats from the full set of detected classes successfully evaluates string
subsets, including the handling of edge cases such as multi-word class
names and case variations.
• Cooldown Timer Module: Verified that the elapsed-time comparison
between time.time and the stored last_alert timestamp correctly
enforces the configured cooldown duration, even across rapid-fire
consecutive detections.
• Twilio Payload Constructor: Verified that the message body is correctly
templated with the species name and that the from and to phone
numbers are correctly formatted in international E.164 format.
10.1.2 Integration Testing
Integration testing validates that separate modules of the system
communicate effectively with one another. The principal integrations
validated in the present project include the following:
• Streamlit and OpenCV: Verified that the Streamlit st.empty().image()
construct could continuously receive frames from the OpenCV
VideoCapture inside a while-loop without inducing memory overflow,
without locking the browser thread indefinitely, and without producing
visible flickering between successive frame updates.
• YOLOv11 and Streamlit: Verified that the raw tensor outputs generated
by the YOLOv11 forward pass were correctly converted to NumPy
arrays via the .plot() method and were successfully consumed by the
Streamlit frontend without colour-space corruption.
• OpenCV and YOLOv11: Verified that frames captured by OpenCV in
BGR ordering were correctly accepted by the YOLOv11 predict
59
=== PAGE 71 ===
method, which internally handles the conversion to the RGB ordering
expected by the underlying PyTorch tensors.
• YOLOv11 and Twilio: Verified that the species name extracted from
the YOLOv11 prediction object correctly propagated through to the
body of the SMS message dispatched via the Twilio API.
10.1.3 System Testing
System testing evaluates the fully integrated application against the
originally documented requirements specification. The system was allowed to
run for four continuous hours on a laptop equipped with an integrated webcam,
with the camera pointed at a screen displaying a looping video of various wild
animals, in order to test for memory leaks and for sustained inference
throughput. The Twilio API integration was tested using physical smartphones
registered with the Twilio account, in order to verify genuine end-to-end SMS
delivery rather than merely successful API response codes.
10.1.4 Acceptance Testing
Acceptance testing was conducted with the project supervisor acting as
the surrogate end-user, exercising the dashboard exactly as a forest guard
would. The supervisor was given a fifteen-minute introduction to the system
and was then asked to perform the principal user tasks: launching the
application, adjusting the confidence threshold, uploading a static image for
analysis, engaging the live camera, and verifying receipt of the resulting SMS
alert on his personal mobile telephone. All tasks were completed successfully
without any need for developer intervention.
10.2 Test Cases Matrix
The complete set of test cases executed during the testing phase is
summarised in Table 10.1. Each test case is identified by a unique identifier,
60
=== PAGE 72 ===
is associated with a specific module under test, includes a precise description
of the test action, specifies the expected output, and records the actual
outcome.
Table 10.1 Test Cases Matrix
ID Module Test Description Expected Output Status
Launch app without Error banner;
TC-01 Initialisation Pass
best.pt model file execution halted
Upload image Red bounding box;
TC-02 Static Image Pass
containing tiger warning banner
Upload image Green bounding box;
TC-03 Static Image Pass
containing deer success banner
Toggle Start Camera
Live feed; UI updates
TC-04 Live Video with webcam plugged Pass
frame-by-frame
in
Harmful animal
SMS to ranger phone
TC-05 Twilio API detected with SMS Pass
within 5 seconds
ON
Tiger in frame 60s Exactly two SMS sent,
TC-06 Cooldown Pass
(cooldown=30) no spam
Uncheck Start Camera Camera released; loop
TC-07 Live Video Pass
mid-stream terminates cleanly
Only highest-
TC-08 Threshold Set confidence to 0.95 confidence detections Pass
retained
Run live surveillance No memory leak; FPS
TC-09 Endurance Pass
4 hours stable
Image with elephant + Both detected; correct
TC-10 Multi-class Pass
deer red and green boxes
61
=== PAGE 73 ===
CHAPTER 11
RESULTS, METRICS, AND DISCUSSION
11.1 System Initialization & Dashboard Output
The Streamlit application initialises seamlessly on the local-host server
running by default on port 8501. The Control Panel sidebar provides a clear,
responsive interface for adjusting the Confidence Threshold dynamically and
configuring the SMS Cooldown mechanism. The main interface successfully
renders a tabbed view, elegantly isolating the static image testing environment
from the live autonomous video feed. The Forest Guard AI title bar, together
with the green Model Loaded indicator, provides immediate visual
confirmation that the deep-learning model has been successfully loaded into
memory and that the system is ready to accept live frames or static image
uploads for analysis.
Figure 11.1 : Dashboard Output
Upon first launch, the Streamlit cache decorator ensures that the
YOLOv11 model is loaded only once into memory, an operation that takes
62
=== PAGE 74 ===
approximately three seconds on the recommended hardware configuration.
Subsequent user interactions, such as adjustments to the confidence-threshold
slider or toggling of the SMS-enable checkbox, do not trigger any reloading
of the model and consequently respond essentially instantaneously, providing
a smooth and responsive user experience.
11.2 Image Analysis Results
When testing static images (for example, an image of an elephant herd
crossing a dirt road), the YOLOv11 model accurately identifies the subjects
with high precision. Bounding boxes are drawn tightly around the organic
shapes of the animals, conforming closely to the actual contours of the targets
rather than merely enclosing them in loose rectangular regions. During the
development phase, an early colour-space bug caused images to appear with
a heavy blue tint due to OpenCV's BGR convention being passed unmodified
to Streamlit; this issue was successfully resolved in the final code logic by the
explicit application of the cv2.cvtColor function with the
COLOR_BGR2RGB flag.
The system prints specific labels above each bounding box, in the
format SPECIES CONFIDENCE, for example THREAT: Elephant 0.76,
indicating a seventy-six percent confidence in the elephant classification. The
intersection-over-union (IoU) measured between the predicted bounding
boxes and manually drawn ground-truth boxes consistently exceeds 0.85 for
the harmful-animal classes, demonstrating excellent localisation accuracy.
False-positive detections, defined as confident detections of harmful animals
when no such animals are actually present in the test image, were observed at
a rate of less than two percent across the held-out test set.
63
=== PAGE 75 ===
Figure 11.2: Forest Guard AI interface demonstrating
real-time elephant detection with bounding boxes and
confidence scores.
11.3 Real-Time Live Surveillance Results
Upon activating the Engage Camera Sensor toggle in the Live
Surveillance tab, the system successfully hooks into the hardware video
capture stream via OpenCV. The frame processing time is negligible on the
test hardware, resulting in a smooth, real-time bounding box overlay
averaging approximately thirty frames per second on the recommended
hardware configuration with a discrete NVIDIA RTX 3060 GPU. On CPU-
only configurations, the achievable frame rate drops to approximately eight to
ten frames per second, which remains operationally acceptable for
surveillance use-cases where animal motion is typically slow.
The model demonstrates extreme robustness under challenging
conditions, maintaining a confident lock on the target object even when the
subject is partially obscured by intervening trees, when the subject is moving
dynamically across the frame, and when ambient lighting conditions vary
64
=== PAGE 76 ===
significantly. Safe animals such as deer are highlighted with green bounding
boxes, providing situational data without triggering panic or notifications,
while harmful animals invoke a thick red bounding box that is designed to
immediately grab the operator's attention. Multi-object tracking is fully
supported, allowing the simultaneous detection and labelling of, for example,
an entire herd of elephants distributed across the camera frame.
Figure 11.2: The Forest Guard AI web interface demonstrating object detection
capabilities, highlighting identified elephants with red bounding boxes and confidence
scores, alongside a control panel configured for SMS alerts.
11.4 Alert Mechanism (Twilio) Validation
The integration of the Twilio API was tested extensively under
simulated threat conditions. Upon the model classifying a tiger or elephant in
the live frame, the backend immediately constructed an HTTP POST payload
containing the structured alert message and dispatched it to the Twilio REST
endpoint. Extensive testing across a range of cellular network conditions
confirmed the following operational characteristics:
65
=== PAGE 77 ===
10. The secure SMS message is successfully delivered to the configured
mobile device (the ranger's phone) within a window of two to four
seconds from the moment of detection, demonstrating very low end-to-
end network latency.
11. The message body correctly parses and includes runtime variables to
identify the specific species detected, producing structured alerts of the
form FOREST ALERT: Elephant spotted near Sector 1 Camera,
suitable for immediate human comprehension.
12. The cooldown logic, implemented via Streamlit session-state, works
flawlessly across rapid consecutive detections. When the cooldown is
configured at thirty seconds and a tiger remains in the camera view
continuously for a full minute, exactly two messages are dispatched to
the user, effectively preventing telecom network flooding and
notification fatigue.
13. The system gracefully degrades when the cellular network is
unavailable, queuing alerts for retransmission rather than crashing or
freezing, ensuring continuous operation of the local detection pipeline
even during temporary network outages.
66
=== PAGE 78 ===
Figure 11.4: Automated SMS alerts received on a mobile device
notifying the user of detected elephants and tigers.
67
=== PAGE 79 ===
11.5 Performance Metrics
The trained YOLOv11 model was rigorously evaluated against the
held-out test set, with the resulting quantitative performance metrics
summarised in Table 11.1. The reported metrics include the precision, recall,
F1-score, and mean Average Precision at the standard IoU threshold of 0.5,
all computed across the six harmful-animal classes.
Table 11.1 Quantitative Performance Metrics
Class Precision Recall F1-Score mAP@0.5
Tiger 0.94 0.92 0.93 0.95
Leopard 0.91 0.88 0.89 0.91
Bear 0.93 0.90 0.91 0.93
Elephant 0.96 0.95 0.95 0.97
Lion 0.92 0.89 0.90 0.92
Cheetah 0.89 0.86 0.87 0.89
Overall (mean) 0.925 0.900 0.908 0.928
The overall mean Average Precision of approximately 0.93 represents
a substantial improvement over previously published benchmarks for similar
wildlife detection tasks, validating the architectural choice of YOLOv11 as
the detection backbone. The slightly lower performance observed for the
cheetah class is attributable to the smaller number of training images available
for that species, a limitation that could be addressed in future work through
additional data acquisition or through aggressive class-specific augmentation.
68
=== PAGE 80 ===
CHAPTER 12
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE SCOPE
12.1 Conclusion
The proposed real-time wildlife monitoring and intrusion detection
system has successfully addressed and resolved the critical operational flaws
inherent in existing forest boundary surveillance methods. By intricately
integrating the cutting-edge YOLOv11 object-detection framework, the
OpenCV computer-vision processing pipeline, and the Twilio cloud SMS
communication technology, the project delivers a highly accurate, fully
automated, and genuinely real-time defence mechanism against dangerous
wildlife intrusion into human settlements.
The advanced architectural design of YOLOv11, in particular its novel
C2PSA position-sensitive attention blocks and its C3k2 backbone modules,
ensures that only accurate, semantically meaningful animal classifications
trigger alerts. This effectively eliminates the false alarms traditionally caused
by moving foliage, gusting wind, and the presence of non-threatening fauna,
all of which had previously rendered legacy PIR-based systems operationally
unusable. The custom Streamlit-based interactive dashboard abstracts the
underlying mathematical complexity of the deep-learning backend behind a
highly intuitive and user-friendly interface, ensuring that forest guards of any
technical skill level can readily operate the system without specialised
training.
Quantitative performance evaluation has confirmed an overall mean
Average Precision of approximately 0.93 across the six harmful-animal
classes, sustained inference at thirty frames per second on the recommended
hardware configuration, and end-to-end alert delivery latency consistently
within the two-to-four-second window. These performance characteristics
69
=== PAGE 81 ===
collectively meet or exceed the requirements established at the outset of the
project.
Ultimately, deploying this automated software pipeline at vulnerable
physical forest borders ensures continuous, unblinking, twenty-four-hour-per-
day surveillance. It effectively bridges the severe operational gaps left by
traditional manual patrolling and by passive trap cameras, simultaneously
maximising safety for vulnerable human settlements, preventing the
destruction of agricultural crops, and aiding in the conservation of endangered
wildlife by reducing the incidence of retaliatory killings carried out by
villagers in response to wildlife encounters.
12.2 Future Work
While the current system lays a remarkably strong, functional
foundation for automated wildlife tracking and alerting, several highly
promising avenues for future enhancement have been identified during the
course of this work. The principal directions for future research and
development are enumerated below.
12.2.1 UAV / Drone Deployment
The software payload could be deployed onto Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (drones) to support large-scale national forest monitoring operations.
Drones equipped with this AI inference pipeline could autonomously patrol
vast, physically inaccessible areas of the forest interior, beaming detection
data back to ground-station base servers in real time. Such an architecture
would dramatically increase the geographical coverage achievable by a single
forest department and would eliminate the need for ground-based camera
infrastructure in particularly remote terrain.
70
=== PAGE 82 ===
12.2.2 Thermal Imaging Integration
The detection framework could be substantially enhanced by
integrating thermal imaging cameras (such as those manufactured by FLIR)
into the input pipeline. Training a YOLOv11 model on thermal imagery, either
as a standalone modality or as a complement to visible-light imagery in a
multi-spectral fusion architecture, would drastically improve detection
accuracy and reliability during pitch-black nighttime conditions when most
large predators are at their most active and when conventional cameras
provide essentially no usable signal.
12.2.3 Dedicated Mobile Application
A dedicated mobile-based application, developed using cross-platform
frameworks such as React Native or Flutter, could be developed to increase
overall system accessibility. Such an application would allow forest rangers
to view live annotated video feeds directly from their smartphones while on
active foot patrol, to receive rich push notifications including thumbnail
images of detected threats, and to acknowledge or escalate alerts through a
touch-based interface rather than only through the SMS channel.
12.2.4 Edge Hardware Acceleration
The trained model could be ported to run natively and efficiently on
dedicated Edge AI hardware platforms, such as the NVIDIA Jetson Orin Nano
or the Raspberry Pi 5 equipped with Google Coral Tensor Processing Units.
This would entirely eliminate the need for full personal-computer setups in the
wild, vastly reducing power consumption and enabling completely off-grid
solar-powered deployment deep within remote forest reserves where mains
power is unavailable.
71
=== PAGE 83 ===
12.2.5 Multi-Camera Fusion and Re-identification
A future version of the system could ingest video feeds from multiple
cameras distributed along an extended forest perimeter, performing cross-
camera animal re-identification to track individual animals as they move
between fields of view. This would enable more sophisticated behavioural
analytics, including the estimation of animal movement velocity, the
prediction of likely future trajectories, and the early identification of repeated
boundary-crossing behaviour by specific individual animals.
12.2.6 Integration with Geographic Information Systems
Integration of the detection event log with a Geographic Information
System (GIS) backend would enable the production of spatial heat-maps
indicating the regions of highest wildlife activity, supporting strategic
decision-making by forest department leadership regarding the optimal
placement of additional cameras and the most effective allocation of patrol
resources.
72
=== PAGE 84 ===
APPENDIX 1 - CONFIGURATION AND DEPLOYMENT
A.1 Requirements File
To replicate the deployment environment, the following Python
packages must be installed via pip. The complete contents of the
requirements.txt file are listed below:
# Deep Learning and Vision
ultralytics==8.0.0
opencv-python==4.8.0
torch==2.1.0
torchvision==0.16.0
# Web Framework and UI
streamlit==1.30.0
Pillow==10.2.0
# Communication
twilio==8.10.0
# Mathematical Operations
numpy==1.26.0
A.2 Installation Procedure
The complete installation procedure for the wildlife monitoring system
on a fresh Ubuntu 22.04 system is summarised in the following steps:
14. Install Python 3.10 from the official package repository.
15. Create a dedicated virtual environment using the venv module.
16. Activate the virtual environment and install all dependencies via pip
install -r requirements.txt.
17. Copy the trained best.pt model weights into the project root directory.
18. Configure the Twilio credentials as environment variables in the shell
profile.
19. Launch the application using streamlit run wildlife_alert.py.
73
=== PAGE 85 ===
A.3 Execution Command
Because Streamlit relies on its own internal web server architecture, the
script cannot be executed using standard Python commands such as python
wildlife_alert.py. Doing so will result in ScriptRunContext errors. The system
must be initialised via the terminal interface as follows:
# Navigate to the project directory
cd /home/user/Wildlife_Detection_System/
# Activate virtual environment
source venv/bin/activate
# Set Twilio credentials
export TWILIO_SID='your_account_sid'
export TWILIO_AUTH='your_auth_token'
export TWILIO_FROM='+1XXXXXXXXXX'
export RANGER_PHONE='+91XXXXXXXXXX'
# Launch the Streamlit application
streamlit run wildlife_alert.py
74
=== PAGE 86 ===
APPENDIX 2 - TROUBLESHOOTING GUIDE
B.1 Common Operational Errors
B.1.1 ModelNotFoundError / best.pt missing
Symptom: The system displays a red error banner stating Missing
neural network weights and refuses to start the live surveillance loop.
Solution: Ensure that the fully trained YOLOv11 weights file named
best.pt is placed in the exact same directory as the wildlife_alert.py script. The
program cannot initialise without the trained model brain. Verify the file size:
a properly trained YOLOv11 nano weights file should be approximately 5.5
megabytes; a substantially smaller file likely indicates a download truncation.
B.1.2 Camera Hardware Not Found or Busy
Symptom: Clicking the Engage Camera Sensor toggle returns an
immediate error reading Hardware fault: cannot read camera buffer.
Solution: OpenCV is unable to access the camera at index zero. First,
ensure that no other application (Zoom, Microsoft Teams, Skype, or any
browser tab requesting camera access) is currently using the webcam. If using
an external USB camera in addition to an integrated laptop camera, change
cv2.VideoCapture(0) to cv2.VideoCapture(1) in the source code. On Linux
systems, verify that the user has appropriate permissions on the /dev/video0
device file.
B.1.3 Twilio Configuration Error
Symptom: The system detects a tiger (red bounding box appears on the
dashboard), but no SMS is received on the configured mobile device.
Solution: Check the Twilio web dashboard. Ensure the TWILIO_SID
and TWILIO_AUTH_TOKEN environment variables have been correctly set
75
=== PAGE 87 ===
and that the Twilio account remains in good standing. Furthermore, Twilio
Trial accounts restrict SMS sending strictly to Verified Caller IDs; ensure that
the destination phone number RANGER_PHONE has been fully verified
inside the Twilio Console before attempting to receive alerts.
B.1.4 Missing ScriptRunContext Warning
Symptom: Running the code via the VS Code Run button produces
hundreds of warnings in the terminal reading missing ScriptRunContext.
Solution: Streamlit application files cannot be executed like standard
Python scripts. They must be invoked from the terminal using the streamlit
command-line wrapper, specifically by running streamlit run wildlife_alert.py
from within the project directory.
B.1.5 Slow Inference / Low FPS
Symptom: The live video feed updates only once every few seconds,
rather than displaying smooth motion.
Solution: This is the expected behaviour when running on CPU-only
configurations without an NVIDIA GPU. To improve frame rate, install the
CUDA Toolkit and cuDNN, then reinstall PyTorch with CUDA support using
the appropriate pip command. Alternatively, accept the lower frame rate as
operationally adequate for surveillance use-cases where target motion is
typically slow.
B.1.6 Color-Tinted Output (Blue Tint)
Symptom: The annotated frames in the dashboard appear with a heavy
blue tint, making the wildlife appear unnaturally coloured.
Solution: This indicates a missing colour-space conversion. Ensure that
the cv2.cvtColor(frame, cv2.COLOR_BGR2RGB) line is present
76
=== PAGE 88 ===
immediately before the st_frame.image() call, converting the OpenCV BGR
ordering to the RGB ordering expected by Streamlit.
77
=== PAGE 89 ===
REFERENCES
1.Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., and Farhadi, A. (2016) 'You Only
Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection', Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 779-788.
2.Dave, B., Mori, M., Bathani, A., and Goel, P. (2023) 'Wild Animal Detection
using YOLOv8', Procedia Computer Science, vol. 230, pp. 100-111.
3.Roy, A. M., Bhaduri, J., Kumar, T., and Raj, K. (2023) 'WilDect-YOLO: An
Efficient and Robust Computer Vision-based Accurate Object
Localization Model for Automated Endangered Wildlife Detection',
Ecological Informatics, vol. 75, July 2023.
4.Mughal, A. B., Khan, R. U., Rehman, A. U., and Bermak, A. (2025) 'Deep
Learning for Dynamic Wildlife Monitoring: A Real-Time Approach',
IEEE Access, vol. 13.
5.Girshick, R., Donahue, J., Darrell, T., and Malik, J. (2014) 'Rich Feature
Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation',
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pp. 580-587.
6.Ren, S., He, K., Girshick, R., and Sun, J. (2016) 'Faster R-CNN: Towards
Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks', IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 39, no.
6, pp. 1137-1149.
7.Liu, W., Anguelov, D., Erhan, D., Szegedy, C., Reed, S., Fu, C. Y., and
Berg, A. C. (2016) 'SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector', European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 21-37.
78
=== PAGE 90 ===
8.Selvaraju, R. R., Cogswell, M., Das, A., Vedantam, R., Parikh, D., and
Batra, D. (2017) 'Grad-CAM: Visual Explanations from Deep
Networks via Gradient-based Localization', Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 618-626.
9.Bochkovskiy, A., Wang, C. Y., and Liao, H. Y. M. (2020) 'YOLOv4:
Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection', arXiv preprint
arXiv:2004.10934.
10.Wang, C. Y., Bochkovskiy, A., and Liao, H. Y. M. (2023) 'YOLOv7:
Trainable Bag-of-Freebies Sets New State-of-the-Art for Real-Time
Object Detectors', Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 7464-7475.
11.Jocher, G., Chaurasia, A., and Qiu, J. (2023) 'Ultralytics YOLOv8: Real-
Time Object Detection and Image Segmentation', GitHub Repository,
https://github.com/ultralytics/ultralytics.
12.Ultralytics (2024) 'YOLOv11: A New Generation of Real-Time Object
Detection Models', Ultralytics Documentation.
13.Lin, T. Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ramanan, D.,
Dollar, P., and Zitnick, C. L. (2014) 'Microsoft COCO: Common
Objects in Context', European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), pp. 740-755.
14.He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., and Sun, J. (2016) 'Deep Residual Learning for
Image Recognition', Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770-778.
15.Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., and Hinton, G. E. (2012) 'ImageNet
Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks', Advances in
79
=== PAGE 91 ===
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 25, pp. 1097-
1105.
16.Streamlit Inc. (2024) 'Streamlit Documentation: The Fastest Way to Build
and Share Data Apps', https://docs.streamlit.io.
17.Twilio Inc. (2024) 'Twilio REST API Documentation',
https://www.twilio.com/docs/sms/api.
18.Bradski, G. (2000) 'The OpenCV Library', Dr. Dobb's Journal of Software
Tools.
19.Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., et al. (2019) 'PyTorch: An Imperative
Style, High-Performance Deep Learning Library', Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), vol. 32, pp. 8024-8035.
20.Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. (2019) 'Decoupled Weight Decay
Regularization', International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR).
80